--- PAGE 1 ---

13660 IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 11, NO. 8, 15 APRIL 2024
Collaborative Data Acquisition for UA V-Aided IoT
Based on Time-Balancing Scheduling
Mingyuan Ren ,X i u w e nF u ,Member, IEEE , Pasquale Pace ,Member, IEEE ,
Gianluca Aloi ,Member, IEEE , and Giancarlo Fortino ,Fellow, IEEE
Abstract —The emergence of the Internet of Things (IoT) has
revolutionized various domains by enabling seamless connectivityand real-time data exchange between connected IoT devices.However, in sparse deployment scenarios where sensor nodes(SNs) are sparsely distributed, ensuring low data delivery latencybecomes a signiﬁcant challenge. Our research aims to addressthis issue by utilizing unmanned aerial vehicles (UA Vs) tosupport IoT networks. In the existing UA V-aided IoT systems,all UA Vs are required to return to the base station (BS) todeliver data, which results in signiﬁcant data delivery latency.To overcome this limitation, we propose a collaborative dataacquisition model that uses air-to-air data relay between UA Vs.
By leveraging the mobility and agility of UA Vs, the proposed
system facilitates efﬁcient data relay between SNs and theBS. To further optimize the performance of the system, wepresent a time-balancing scheduling data acquisition (TSDA)scheme. This scheme combines a centripetal-based relay pairingmethod for UA Vs to achieve seamless data relay and a jointscheduling scheme to minimize the hovering time during datadelivery. Through extensive simulations, we demonstrate thatthe proposed TSDA scheme can achieve lower data deliverylatency in sparse deployment scenarios compared to existing dataacquisition schemes. In addition, the joint scheduling schemecan signiﬁcantly reduce the hovering time of UA Vs so that thecollaborative relaying advantage can be better exploited.
Index Terms —Data acquisition, delivery latency, joint schedul-
ing, time-balancing, unmanned aerial vehicle (UA V)-aidedInternet of Things (IoT).
Manuscript received 18 July 2023; revised 25 October 2023; accepted 24
November 2023. Date of publication 5 December 2023; date of current version
9 April 2024. This work was supported in part by the Science and TechnologyCommission of Shanghai Municipality under Grant 22692194600; in part bythe Shanghai Natural Science Foundation under Grant 23ZR1426400; and in
part by the Italian MIUR, PRIN 2017 Project “Fluidware: A Novel Approach
for Large-Scale IoT Systems” under Grant 2017KRC7KT and Grant CUPH24I17000070001. (Corresponding author: Giancarlo Fortino.)
Mingyuan Ren is with the Institute of Logistics Science and Engineering,
Shanghai Maritime University, Shanghai 201306, China (e-mail: renmy98@
163.com).
Xiuwen Fu is with the Logistics Engineering College, Shanghai Maritime
University, Shanghai 201306, China (e-mail: xwfu@shmtu.edu.cn).
Pasquale Pace is with the Department of Informatics, Modeling, Electronics
and Systems, University of Calabria, 87036 Rende, Italy, and also withthe Consorzio Nazionale Interuniversitario per le Telecomunicazioni, 87036Rende, Italy (e-mail: p.pace@dimes.unical.it).
Gianluca Aloi and Giancarlo Fortino are with the Department of
Informatics, Modeling, Electronics and System Engineering, Universityof Calabria, 87036 Rende, Italy (e-mail: aloi@dimes.unical.it; fortino@
dimes.unical.it).
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/JIOT.2023.3339136I. I NTRODUCTION
THE Internet of Things (IoT) is a technology that
enables seamless interaction between the physical and
digital realms of human existence [1],[2],[3]. It has broad
applications in sectors, such as industry [4],[5],[6],[7],[8],
healthcare [9],[10], and transportation [11]. In IoT systems,
the primary function of sensor nodes (SNs) is to efﬁcientlydeliver data to the base station (BS), enabling the system to
respond quickly to unforeseen events. However, achieving low
data delivery latency becomes a signiﬁcant challenge whenSNs are distributed in remote or unattended regions, especially
in remote regions with limited infrastructure. In such scenar-
ios, the use of unmanned aerial vehicles (UA Vs) as mobile
relay nodes has gained signiﬁcant attention where traditional
network infrastructure is absent or inadequate [12],[13].W e
refer to such IoT systems that use UA Vs to support SNs as
UA V-aided IoT. This system is a promising solution to bridge
the communication gap in remote regions, enabling data acqui-
sition and delivery from SNs to the BS [14]. Moreover, this
integration of UA Vs and IoT brings a number of opportunities,offering improved connectivity, reduced latency, and optimized
data freshness.
In the IoT era, the freshness of information is a core
factor for accurate user decision making [15]. For example,
in emergency response scenarios such as disaster manage-
ment or sudden accidents, relying on outdated data can
lead to misguided rescue efforts and potentially serious con-
sequences. Consequently, the Age of Information (AoI), ametric that measures the freshness of IoT data, is crucial in
assessing the data acquisition efﬁciency of UA V-aided IoT
systems [16],[17]. The AoI takes into account factors such as
delivery latency, data waiting time at SNs and data dwell time
at the BS. A low AoI indicates that the information is freshand the system responds quickly. Existing research on UA V-
aided IoT typically divides the task area into subareas equal to
the number of UA Vs. Each UA V follows an optimized ﬂightpath to acquire data within its assigned subarea. This approach
ensures that there is no task overlap. However, it also presents
a challenge: the UA Vs responsible for gathering data from the
marginal areas of the network must move to the BS to deliver
data, which has a negative impact on the AoI.
For this reason, our research paper presents a collaborative
data acquisition model for UA V-aided IoT. On this basis, a
time-balancing scheduling data acquisition (TSDA) scheme is
developed to solve the collaboration problem of UA Vs in the
c/circlecopyrt2023 The Authors. This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License.
For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
--- PAGE 2 ---

REN et al.: COLLABORATIVE DATA ACQUISITION FOR UA V-AIDED IoT BASED ON TIME-BALANCING SCHEDULING 13661
air-to-air delivery process. The main contributions in our work
are summarized as follows.
1) To enable the task collaboration between UA Vs, a
collaborative data acquisition model for UA V-aided IoT
is developed. This model involves three types of datadelivery processes: a) ground-to-air process; b) air-to-air
process; and c) air-to-ground process.
2) In order to facilitate task collaboration among UA Vs,
a centripetal-based relay pairing method for UA Vs is
proposed. In this pairing method, the relay pairing
relationship between UA Vs is determined based on theangle and distance between UA Vs and the BS.
3) To reduce the hovering time of UA Vs during data deliv-
ery, a joint scheduling scheme is proposed. The scheme
allocates the hovering time of each UA V according to
the difference in the length of the closed-loop ﬂight pathand sets the take-off point and ﬂight direction of each
UA V according to the hovering time.
The remaining organization of this article is outlined as
follows. Section IIbrieﬂy sums up the related works in
literature. Section IIIdescribes the collaborative data acqui-
sition model. Section IVpresents the TSDA scheme. In
Section V, simulation results are presented. Finally, this article
is concluded by summarizing the main improvements.
II. R
ELATED WORK
Optimizing UA V ﬂight paths to enhance system AoI has gar-
nered a lot of attention in the ﬁeld of UA V-aided IoT research.
Tong et al. [18] proposed a collaborative SN distribution and
path planning strategy for UA V-aided IoT. Liu et al. [19]
used a uniﬁed approach combining dynamic programming
and genetic algorithm (GA) to determine trajectories thatare optimal in terms of both maximum AoI and average
AoI. Abd-Elmagid et al. [20] designed a deep reinforcement
learning (DRL) algorithm to minimize the weighted sum ofAoI values for different processes of UA Vs. Ahani et al. [21]
developed an algorithm based on graph labeling for reducing
the AoI of SNs. Yi et al. [22] investigated the issue of the age-
optimal data gathering in IoT networks supported by UA Vs,
utilizing DRL as their method of study. Tong et al. [23]
proposed a DRL algorithm to reduce the AoI and packet lossratio of SNs. Liu et al. [24] designed a novel optimization
strategy for path planning of UA Vs that aimed to achieve age-
optimal solutions by combining a clustering algorithm withGA. Jia et al. [25] proposed a solution framework based on
dynamic programming to obtain the optimal path and data
acquisition strategy. Ferdowsi et al. [26] developed a novel
neural combinatorial-based DRL algorithm to reduce the AoI
of SNs. Wang et al. [27] introduced a heuristic-based path-
planning algorithm aimed at minimizing the system AoI. The
main idea of the algorithm is to direct the UA V to the SN with
the highest AoI. Li et al. [28] designed two learning algorithms
based on the Sarsa and value-decomposition network to plan
the path of UA Vs, minimizing the long-term return, which
was characterized by the AoI of SNs, power consumption ofUA Vs, and penalty for inappropriate actions. Deng et al. [29]
presented a path-planning algorithm using the spiral method.The primary objective of this algorithm was to minimize the
time required to complete the mission by efﬁciently planningthe shortest ﬂight path for the UA V while ensuring coverage
of all SNs. Xu et al. [30] developed an improved gray wolf
optimizer algorithm for an optimized multi-UA V cooperativepath planning. Zhu et al. [31] designed a novel algorithm
framework based on the weighted A* to minimize the total
AoI of the acquired data by the UA V from the groundIoT network. In this algorithm, the selection of hovering
points of the UA V and the visiting order to these hovering
points were jointly optimized. Oubbati et al. [32] designed
a multiagent DRL method that aimed to jointly optimize the
trajectories of UA V teams and minimize the expected AoI.
Liao and Friderikos [33] proposed a multiobjective mixed
integer linear programming with a ﬂow-based constraint set
to jointly optimize the average AoI and the aggregate energyconsumption. Liu et al. [34] designed a deep Qnetwork-
based scheme for speedy preparation and path planning of
UAVs. Wu et al. [35] proposed a comprehensive framework
based on artiﬁcial intelligence for UA V path planning. The
framework included a clustering module to determine optimal
hovering positions for the UA V . A neural trajectory solveris used to generate the ﬂight path that minimizes the AoI.
Huang and Fu [36] proposed an AoI-sensitive data acquisition
scheme based on the Hamilton path to achieve better AoIperformance. This scheme used multiple UA Vs to form a
Hamiltonian loop to complete the data acquisition. While this
approach incorporated the concept of air-to-air data relay, itrestricted each UA V to establishing a relay pairing relationship
with only one other UA V . This limitation somewhat reduced
the ﬂexibility of UA V data relay. We summarize the compar-
ison between our work and the existing literature in Table I.
The literature review clearly indicates that the main trend in
existing research is to treat UA Vs as independent individuals,
without any data relaying or task collaboration between them.
The main challenge with this approach is that the UA Vstasked with covering the marginal task area have to move
considerable distances to deliver data to the BS. This has a
serious impact on the average system AoI. The collaborativerelay mode, with its air-to-air data relay, provides an effective
solution to this problem. In this mode, the UA V located at a
signiﬁcant distance from the BS (i.e., far-end UA V) does notneed to return directly to the BS. Instead, the far-end UA V
uses encounter opportunities to deliver data to a UA V nearer
to the BS (i.e., near-end UA V), which then relays the data tothe BS. Although there have been few studies that adopt air-
to-air data relay, these studies do not support ﬂexible pairing
of UA Vs, which to some extent limits the advantages of air-to-
air data relay. The following three research challenges related
to this delivery process need to be addressed.
1) In the UA V-aided IoT, we ﬁrst need to assign reasonable
task areas to UA Vs. When dividing task areas, we need
to consider two factors. On the one hand, to improvedata acquisition efﬁciency, the task area of each UA V
should avoid overlapping. Overlapping task areas can
cause unnecessary ﬂight paths for UA Vs, resulting in awaste of data acquisition time. On the other hand, to
provide sufﬁcient opportunities for data relay of UA Vs,
--- PAGE 3 ---

13662 IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 11, NO. 8, 15 APRIL 2024
TABLE I
COMPARISON BETWEEN OURWORK AND THE EXISTING LITERATURE
the data acquisition task for each UA V in the divided
task areas should be as balanced as possible. If a UA Vundertakes too many data acquisition tasks, the overall
system performance degrades due to the prolonged data
acquisition time of that UA V . In this work, we select thedata acquisition nodes using a centroid-based algorithm
and generate closed-loop ﬂight paths of UA Vs with
balanced data acquisition tasks using GA.
2) Once the task areas have been divided, the next chal-
lenge is determining which UA Vs should act as data
forwarders. Improperly assigning UA Vs to forward data
can result in ineffective air-to-air data relay and may
even result in data not reaching the BS. Therefore, weneed to rationalize the pairing relationships between
UA Vs to ensure that data can be successfully delivered
through feasible routes to the BS. In this work, weuse a centripetal-based relay pairing method to establish
relay pairing relationships between UA Vs. The method
establishes the relay relationship based on the distanceand angle between UA Vs and the BS, ensuring efﬁcient
transmission of data from the far-end UA Vs to the BS
through the relay of the near-end UA Vs.
3) How to provide suitable opportunities for paired UA Vs
to meet and forward data in a timely manner is the core
issue. Therefore, in the ﬂight planning of UA Vs, we needto consider the hovering time, ﬂight direction, and path
modiﬁcation of UA Vs. In this work, we use the diffusion
direction selection method to determine take-off points
and ﬂight directions of UA Vs in a certain order. In this
method, we take the BS as the center and ﬁrst determinethe take-off point and ﬂight direction of the near-end
UA V . We then gradually diffuse outward to determine
Fig. 1. Data acquisition model.
the take-off point and ﬂight direction of the far-end UA V
based on the relay pairing relationship, achieving timelydata relay between paired UA Vs.
III. S
YSTEM MODEL
A. Data Acquisition Model
Our research considers the sparse network scenario where
a predetermined number of SNs are randomly distributed over
the given task area. The constrained wireless communication
range of the low-cost SNs results in the division of the sensor
network into several subnets. The SN cannot communicatewith SNs outside the subnet. Since the subnets are not
connected to each other, SNs cannot deliver data to the BS
through ground multihop data delivery, for which UA Vs areneeded to assist SNs to relay data to the BS. Fig. 1illustrates
the data delivery from the SNs to the BS, which comprises
--- PAGE 4 ---

REN et al.: COLLABORATIVE DATA ACQUISITION FOR UA V-AIDED IoT BASED ON TIME-BALANCING SCHEDULING 13663
Fig. 2. Schematic of the UA V communicating with the BS.
three wireless delivery types: 1) ground-to-air; 2) air-to-air;
and 3) air-to-ground.
1) Ground-to-Air: To guarantee the data acquisition effec-
tiveness of UA Vs, they can only establish communication witha limited number of SNs in the sensor network. Within each
ground subnet, one SN is selected as the data acquisition
node. Data from all SNs within the subnet is converged at thedata acquisition node. The UA V can obtain the data of the
subnet by establishing communication with the corresponding
data acquisition node. To obtain data from all SNs, the
ﬂight paths of UA Vs need to traverse all data acquisition
nodes.
2) Air-to-Air: For the far-end UA Vs that are responsible
for areas far from the BS, ﬂying directly back to the BScan cause serious delivery latency for the data they carry.
Therefore, we introduce a collaborative data relay of UA Vs
(i.e., air-to-air delivery process). The near-end UA V in chargeof the area closer to the BS receives the data acquired by
the far-end UA V at the communication points. The function
of the communication point is to ensure that when theUA V reaches this point, it can forward data through the
wireless link to the designated UA V or the BS. When the two
UA Vs that are required to meet as planned cannot reach the
communication points at the same time, we adopt the “hover
and wait” approach. As shown in Fig. 1, when UA V 1 is at
communication point A and UA V 2 has not yet reached the
designated communication point B, UA V 1 needs to hover.
When UA V 2 arrives at communication point B, the two UA Vscan establish communication. At this point, UA V 1 relays the
data to UA V 2, and the air-to-air delivery process between the
two UA Vs is completed.
3) Air-to-Ground: The near-end UA V is responsible for
delivering data acquired by the far-end UA V to the BS. Whenthe minimum distance between the near-end UA V and the BS
exceeds the wireless communication distance, the near-end
UA V is unable to deliver data to the BS [37]. In this case,
we need to add additional communication points to the ﬂight
path of the near-end UA V to ensure reliable data delivery. As
shown in Fig. 2, the near-end UA V is unable to deliver data
to the BS along the original ﬂight path. For this reason, we
add communication point A to the original ﬂight path so thatalong the new ﬂight path the UA V can send data to the BS at
the communication point A.
After the above delivery process, the data generated by all
SNs can be delivered to the BS through the collaborative relay
of UA Vs.Fig. 3. Evolution of the AoI.
B. AoI Model
We present the AoI as a key performance indicator used to
assess the freshness of data acquired from SNs. Speciﬁcally,
the AoI is determined by the time elapsed since the lastinformation generated by the SNs was received by the BS
[38],[39]. For any given time slot t, we assume that o
n(t)is
the generation time when the BS receives the latest sampledata from the SN n. Therefore, the AoI of the SN ncan be
determined as /Delta1
n(t)=t−on(t). In this work, we assume that
/Delta1n(t)=0 when t=0. As shown in Fig. 3, the AoI of the
SNnat the BS either increases linearly or is determined by
the latest data packet if it is successfully delivered to the BS.
To illustrate with an example, as depicted in Fig. 3, the ﬁrst
data packet is generated by the SN nat time tG
n,1and starts
tracking its lifetime, followed by subsequent data packets at
times tG
n,2,..., tG
n,m. The lifetime of a data packet, which refers
to the time it takes to be generated, delivered to the BS and
ﬁnally replaced by the latest packet, shows a linear increase.As soon as one data packet has successfully delivered from
the SN nto the BS by UA Vs (i.e., t=t
R
n,1,..., tR
n,m),t h eA o I
of the SN nat the BS is updated to the lifetime of this data
packet. As mentioned in [38] and[40], the average AoI of
the SN ncan be written as
/Delta1n(t)=1
TC/integraldisplayTC
0/Delta1n(t)dt (1)
where TCdenotes the time to complete the data acquisition
task. Considering the analysis of the average AoI of the SN,
the average system AoI is calculated as follows:
/Delta1(t)=1
NSNS/summationdisplay
n=1/Delta1n(t)
=1
NSTCNS/summationdisplay
n=1/integraldisplayTC
0/Delta1n(t)dt (2)
where NSrepresents the total number of SNs.
C. Communication Channel Model
We make the assumption that UA Vs use Line-of-Sight (LoS)
links as communication links between them. Furthermore, werequire that the ﬂight altitude of UA Vs needs to exceed that
of any obstacle to ensure unimpeded ﬂight for all UA Vs in
--- PAGE 5 ---

13664 IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 11, NO. 8, 15 APRIL 2024
Fig. 4. Communication channel model.
free space area [41]. The model for path loss between UA Vs
is described as follows:
PLAA=20 log/parenleftbigg4πfSdUU
vL/parenrightbigg
+ηLoS (3)
where fSdenotes the signal frequency; vLdenotes the light
speed; dUUis distance between UA Vs; ηLoS is the LoS-
attenuation factor.
The ground-to-air wireless communication channel includes
probabilistic LoS and Non-LoS (NLoS) parts. The path lossfor the probabilistic LoS and NLoS parts can be described
as follows:
L
LoS=20 log/parenleftbigg4πfSdUS
vL/parenrightbigg
+ηLoS (4)
LNLoS=20 log/parenleftbigg4πfSdUS
vL/parenrightbigg
+ηNLoS (5)
where dUSrepresents the distance between the UA V and the
SN and ηNLoS signiﬁes the attenuation factor resulting from the
NLoS connection. Taking into account this particular scenario,
the probabilities associated with the presence of the LoS
and NLoS parts in the ground-to-air wireless communicationchannel can be expressed as follows:
P
LoS(θ)=1
1+ψexp(−β(θ−ψ))(6)
PNLoS(θ)=1−PLoS(θ) (7)
where the constants ψandβare parameters that are deter-
mined based on the speciﬁc characteristics of the environment
in which the system operates [42];θdenotes the elevation
angle of the communication between the SN and the UA V .According to Fig. 4, we notice that θ=arcsin(H
C/dUS).HC
is the ﬂight altitude of UA Vs. The ground-to-air path loss takes
into account both probabilistic LoS and NLoS parts, which isdeﬁned as
PL
AG=LLoSPLoS(θ)+LNLoSPNLoS(θ)
=ηLoS−ηNLoS
1+ψexp/parenleftBig
−β(arcsin(HC
dUS)−ψ)/parenrightBig
+20 log/parenleftbigg4πfSdUS
vL/parenrightbigg
+ηNLoS. (8)
To guarantee the wireless communication quality, PLAA
and PLAG are both less than or equal to threshold
value PLAA
THand PLAG
TH, respectively (i.e., PLAA≤PLAA
TH,PLAG≤PLAG
TH)[43],[44],[45]. In this work, we deﬁne the
maximum communication distance between UA Vs as DAA=
dUU|PLAA=PLAA
TH. Also, we deﬁne the maximum communica-
tion distance between the UA V and the SN as DAG=
dUS|PLAG=PLAG
TH.
D. Energy Model
The energy consumption of the UA V is divided into two
main components: 1) the energy used for communication and
2) the energy used for propulsion. However, as the energyrequired for communication is comparatively small, we focus
primarily on propulsion energy consumption [46],[47].W e
useE
Uto represent the initial energy capacity of the UA V .
The propulsion power consumption can be expressed by the
following formula:
/tildewideP(vt)=PBLA/parenleftBigg
1+3v2
t
U2
TIP/parenrightBigg
+PIND/parenleftBigg/radicalBigg
1+v4t
4v4
0−v2
t
2v2
0/parenrightBigg1
2
+1
2d0ρs0Av3
t (9)
where PBLA and PIND denote the power consumed by the
blade and induced power, respectively, when the UA V hovers;the UA V’s speed at any given time t, is represented as v
t;
UTIPdenotes the tip speed of the UA V; v0is the average rotor
induced velocity during hovering. The fuselage drag ratio isdenoted by d
0. The air density is represented by ρ,w h i l e s0
refers to the solidity of the rotor. The area of the rotor disk
is represented by A. We set the BS with a charging function.
The UA V can be efﬁciently recharged by returning to the BS
during data acquisition. At this point, each UA V should satisfy
TRB/summationdisplay
t=1/tildewideP(vt)τ≤EU (10)
where TRBdenotes the time slot when the UA V returns to the
BS;τdenotes the time length of each slot.
IV . T IME-BALANCING SCHEDULING
DATA ACQUISITION SCHEME
A. TSDA Scheme Framework
To realize collaborative data acquisition by multiple UA Vs,
a TSDA scheme is proposed. As shown in Fig. 5,i nt h e
TSDA scheme, the initial paths of UA Vs that traverse all data
acquisition nodes are ﬁrst generated. Then, to achieve seamless
data relay between UA Vs, a centripetal-based relay pairingmethod for UA Vs is proposed. On this basis, we modify the
initial ﬂight paths depending on the relay pairing relationship.
Finally, the hovering time, take-off points, and ﬂight directionsof UA Vs are jointly planned to ensure the timeliness of data
delivery between UA Vs.
B. Selection of Data Acquisition Nodes
Considering the limited wireless communication range of
SNs, we make the assumption that the sensor network iscomposed of N
Csubnets. In order to efﬁciently acquire data
from the subnets, we designate a speciﬁc SN as a data
--- PAGE 6 ---

REN et al.: COLLABORATIVE DATA ACQUISITION FOR UA V-AIDED IoT BASED ON TIME-BALANCING SCHEDULING 13665
Fig. 5. TSDA scheme.
Fig. 6. Selection of data acquisition nodes.
acquisition node from each subnet. Its role is to acquire the
data generated within its respective subnet, allowing data to
be acquired whenever communication is established betweenthe UA V and the data acquisition node. To determine the data
acquisition nodes for the subnets, we propose a centroid-based
algorithm. This algorithm enables the selection of optimal data
acquisition nodes for effective data acquisition within each
subnet.
As depicted in Fig. 6, we designate the SN in each subnet
that is nearest to the centroid as the initial data acquisition
node, denoted by the set {C
1,C2,C3,C4,C5}. The centroid in
each subnet can be calculated by
xS
i=/summationtextnS
i
j=1xi,j
nS
i(11)
yS
i=/summationtextnS
i
j=1yi,j
nS
i(12)
where (xS
i,yS
i) denotes the coordinates of centroid in subnet i;
(xi,j,yi,j) denotes the coordinates of the SN jin subnet i;nS
i
denotes the number of SNs in subnet i. Based on the initialAlgorithm 1 Data Acquisition Nodes Selection Algorithm
Input: PD={PD
1,PD
2,..., PD
NC}
Output: PC
1:foreach PD
iinPDdo
2: Calculate the centroid of subnet i
3: Select the initial data acquisition node in subnet i
4:end for
5:Calculate centroids of closed loops
6:foreach PD
iinPDdo
7: Update the data acquisition node in subnet i
8:end for
9:return PC
data acquisition nodes, we can generate the initial ﬂight paths
for the UA Vs, as detailed in Section IV-C . These ﬂight paths
can form several closed loops. A closed loop is deﬁned as
a complete circle that a UA V can traverse starting from a
point and eventually return to the same point without retracing
any part of the ﬂight path. By leveraging these closed loopsdelineated by the initial ﬂight paths of UA Vs, the centroid of
each closed loop can be calculated by
x
C
k=/summationtextNC
i=1wS
i,kxS
i/summationtextNC
i=1wS
i,k(13)
yC
k=/summationtextNC
i=1wS
i,kyS
i/summationtextNC
i=1wS
i,k(14)
where (xC
k,yC
k) denotes the coordinates of closed-loop centroid
k;wS
i,k=1 denotes the centroid of subnet iis in the closed
loop k;wS
i,k=0 denotes the centroid of subnet iis not
in the closed loop k; ﬁnally, we designate the SN that is
nearest to the closed-loop centroid as the data acquisition node{C
∗
1,C∗
2,C∗
3,C∗
4,C∗
5}, which is shown in Fig. 6. By contracting
all the closed loops through the above steps, we can obtain the
new ﬂight path, and the data acquisition nodes that comprise
these closed loops are our ﬁnalized data acquisition nodes.
The detailed procedures of data acquisition node selection aresummarized in Algorithm 1.P
D
idenotes the set of SNs in
subnet i, and PCdenotes the set of determined data acquisition
nodes.
C. Initial Flight Path Planning of UAVs
In order to acquire data from all subnets, we generate
initial ﬂight paths for UA Vs that can efﬁciently traverse all the
designated data acquisition nodes. This path planning problem
can be regarded as a typical multiple traveling salesman
problem (MTSP). To solve the problem, we assume that
NAUA Vs are deployed, the following decision variables can
be deﬁned:
wU
i,j,k=/braceleftbigg1,UAV kﬂies from pC
itopC
j
0,otherwise(15)
wC
j,k=/braceleftbigg1,UAV ktraverses pC
j
0,otherwise(16)
--- PAGE 7 ---

13666 IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 11, NO. 8, 15 APRIL 2024
Fig. 7. Schematic of two-part chromosome encoding.
where pC
idenotes the data acquisition node selected for subnet
i;dC
i,jdenotes the Euclidean distance between data acquisition
nodes pC
iandpC
j. On this basis, the objective function is set
as follows:
min⎧
⎨
⎩max
1≤k≤NA⎧
⎨
⎩NC/summationdisplay
i=1NC/summationdisplay
j=1dC
i,jwU
i,j,k⎫
⎬
⎭⎫
⎬
⎭(17)
s.t.NC/summationdisplay
i=1wU
i,j,k+NC/summationdisplay
i=1wU
j,i,k∈{0,2} (18)
NA/summationdisplay
k=1wC
j,k=1 (19)
ui,k−uj,k+NCwU
i,j,k≤NC−1 (20)
NC/summationdisplay
j=1wC
j,k≥NL (21)
where ui,kis an auxiliary variable representing the order in
which UA V ktraverses the data acquisition nodes pC
iin its
ﬂight path. The objective function (17) is used to require
that the closed-loop ﬂight path of the UA V with the longest
ﬂight path length among NAUA Vs should be as short as
possible; (18) requires that the ﬂight path of each UA V is a
closed-loop path; (19) requires that each data acquisition node
can only be acquired by one UA V and only once; (20) is used
to constrain each UA V not to generate subtours; (21) requires
each UA V to acquire at least NLdata acquisition nodes. NL
is set to 3 because the number of nodes to be traversed by
the UA V to generate a closed-loop path is at least 3. Byadding this constraint, the solution space of the problem can
be signiﬁcantly reduced.
GA has superior global search capabilities compared
to other heuristic algorithms. When used as a basic
method or combined with other heuristic algorithms as
a hybrid algorithm, GA can produce high diversity and
high-quality samples, avoiding falling into local optima
prematurely and having higher chances of ﬁnding theglobal optimum of multimodal functions [48],[49],[50].
Therefore, GA is widely used to solve complex combinatorial
optimization problems such as MTSP. Additionally, manystudies [51],[52],[53] have shown that compared to other
heuristic algorithms, GA can ﬂexibly handle constraints indifferent scenarios when solving MTSP while maintaining
high computational efﬁciency. Based on these two reasons, this
study chooses the GA algorithm to solve the proposed path
planning problem. The details of this algorithm are as follows.
1) Encoding: We use the two-part chromosome coding
method to denote the pairing relationship between UA Vs and
data acquisition nodes [54],[55],[56]. This method expresses
the path as a sequential arrangement of numbers where each
data acquisition node is assigned to a different sequential
number in advance. We organize these numbers in the order
of the UA Vs visit. To illustrate the concept, we consider
the scenario where three UA Vs are navigating through tendata acquisition nodes, as depicted in Fig. 7. Chromosome I
represents the ﬂight path of the UA V through the ten data
acquisition nodes. Chromosome II represents the sequentiallocation of the breakpoints of the path that divides chromo-
some I into multiple segments. On the basis of the coding
of chromosome I and chromosome II, the paths of UA Vsare presented in Fig. 7. UA V 1 starts from point 6, passes
point 2 and point 5, and ﬁnally returns to node 6; UA V 2 starts
from point 1, passes point 3, point 9, and point 4, and ﬁnallyreturns to point 1; UA V 3 starts from point 10, passes point 8
and point 7, and ﬁnally returns to point 10. To satisfy the
requirement that each UA V must traverse at least N
Ldata
acquisition nodes in the scenario with NCdata acquisition
nodes, the coding of chromosome II must satisfy the following
constraint.
1) Arrange the numbers in chromosome II in ascending
order.
2) Ensure that the difference between any two adjacent
numbers is not less than NL.
3) The ﬁrst number should be larger than or equal to NL.
4) The difference between NCand the last number should
be greater than or equal to NL.
2) Fitness Function: The evaluation of the population is
determined by the ﬁtness function ( 17). In most cases, a higher
ﬁtness value indicates a higher adaptability of an individual
to the environment. In this context, the ﬁtness value refers tothe reciprocal of the maximum path distance of all UA V ﬂight
paths where the maximum path distance is smaller, implying
a better path solution.
3) Selection: After evaluating the ﬁtness value of each
individual in the current population, our reproduction process
--- PAGE 8 ---

REN et al.: COLLABORATIVE DATA ACQUISITION FOR UA V-AIDED IoT BASED ON TIME-BALANCING SCHEDULING 13667
Fig. 8. Schematic of chromosome mutation operator.
for the next generation involves selecting individuals using
roulette selection and elite strategy. The elite strategy ﬁrst
identiﬁes the best performing individual and preserves it forthe next generation. This ensures that the individual with the
highest ﬁtness value is undoubtedly carried forward to the
next iteration. The remaining individuals are then selectedusing the roulette wheel method. The roulette selection and
elite strategy not only ensure that a higher proportion of
dominant individuals are retained in each iteration but alsohelp to prevent the algorithm from converging prematurely on
a particular solution.
4) Mutation: Mutation operations play a vital role in gen-
erating new individuals and enhancing the diversity within
the population. To ensure effective global search capability, arange of mutation operators are employed.
For chromosome I, we employ three speciﬁc types of
mutation operations: ﬂip, swap, and slide, as illustrated in
Fig. 8. Prior to performing the mutation, we ﬁrst randomly
select a section, represented by the range from I to J. Thismeans that the segment from position I to J within the path
undergoes mutation. Furthermore, we randomly generate an
insertion position P, taking into consideration the values of Iand J. The path mutation operation is as follows.
1)Flip: The sequence of numbers within the segment from
position I to J is reversed. Subsequently, the entiresegment from I to J, in its reversed order, is inserted at
the randomly generated insertion position P.
2)Swap: The number at position I is swapped with the
number at position J. After the swap, the entire segment
from I to J is inserted at the insertion position P.
3)Slide: The numbers within the segment from position
I to J are cyclically shifted one position in the same
direction. Following the shift, the entire segment from I
to J is inserted at the insertion position P.
For chromosome II, the gene is regenerated by random
regeneration under satisfying coding constraints. Therefore,
when an individual is mutated, seven new individuals are
created by combining the mutations of chromosome I and
chromosome II, as shown in Fig. 8. Among these eight
individuals, the one with the highest ﬁtness value is selected
as the result of the mutation and kept in the population.
Fig. 9shows an example of the initial ﬂight path planning
of UA Vs. In this example, the far-end UA V 1 is responsible
for data acquisition in subnets 1–3 and the near-end UA V 2 is
Fig. 9. Initial ﬂight path planning of UA Vs.
responsible for data acquisition in subnets 4–7. Although all
subnets in the network can be traversed at this point, there is
no suitable encounter opportunity between the far-end UA V 1
and the near-end UA V 2. For this reason, the initial ﬂight path
needs to be modiﬁed to ensure that the data acquired by the far-
end UA V can reach the BS via the relay of the near-end UA V .
D. Relay Pairing Method for UAVs
After completing the initial path planning of UA Vs, the
next problem we need to solve is which the near-end UA Vshould be used to forward the data from the far-end UA V .
Since all data in IoT is aggregated at the BS, the message
routing direction is usually directed to the BS (i.e., centripetalfeature). Therefore, a centripetal-based relay pairing method
for UA Vs is designed, the purpose of which is to avoid invalid
data delivery between UA Vs by reasonably pairing the far-endand the near-end UA Vs.
The basic idea of the relay pairing method is: 1) in the case
that the distances between all candidate pairing UA Vs and thetarget UA V are similar, the target UA V prefers to establish
a relay pairing relationship with the candidate pairing UA V
with better centripetal performance and 2) in the case that all
candidate pairing UA Vs have similar centripetal performance,
the target UA V prefers to establish a relay pairing relationshipwith the candidate pairing UA V that is closer to it. Here, the
mentioned centripetal performance is negatively related to the
angle formed by taking the target UA V as the vertex andthe candidate pairing UA V and the BS as the endpoint. The
smaller the angle is, the better the centripetal performance of
--- PAGE 9 ---

13668 IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 11, NO. 8, 15 APRIL 2024
Algorithm 2 Centripetal-Based Relay Pairing Method
Input: PR=/braceleftBig
PR
1,PR
2...PR
NA/bracerightBig
,pB
Output: Relay pairing relationship
1:foreach PR
iinPRdo
2: Calculate closed-loop centroid pS
ifrom PR
i
3:end for
4:Obtain the closest point pS
ito the BS and establish a
pairing relationship between UA V iand the BS
5:PS∗←PS\{pS
i}
6:foreach pS∗
jinPS∗do
7: foreach pS
kinPSdo
8: Calculate gj,k
9: end for
10: Obtain max 1≤k≤NA/braceleftbig
gj,k/bracerightbig
and optimal point pS
k
11: if/vextenddouble/vextenddouble/vextenddoublepS∗
j,pB/vextenddouble/vextenddouble/vextenddouble>/vextenddouble/vextenddouble/vextenddoublepS∗
j,pS
k/vextenddouble/vextenddouble/vextenddoubleand/vextenddouble/vextenddouble/vextenddoublepS∗
j,pB/vextenddouble/vextenddouble/vextenddouble>/vextenddouble/vextenddoublepS
k,pB/vextenddouble/vextenddouble
then
12: Establish a pairing relationship between
UAV jand UA V k
13: else
14: Establish a pairing relationship between
UAV jand the BS
15: end if
16:end for
17:return Relay pairing relationship
the candidate pairing UA V . When the angle is zero, the target
UA V , the candidate pairing UA V , and the BS form a straight
line. In this case, the centripetal performance of the candidatepairing UA V is the best. Based on this idea, we propose a
relay pairing relationship evaluation function
g
i,j=1
αai,j
max 1≤j≤NA{ai,j}+(1−α)dS
i,j
max 1≤j≤NA/braceleftBig
dS
i,j/bracerightBig(22)
where αis the centripetal weight; ai,jis the angle formed by
taking the centroid ias the vertex and the centroid jand the
BS as the endpoint; dS
i,jis the distance between the centroid
iand the centroid j. The centroid idenotes the centroid of
the closed-loop path of UA V i, which is the average value of
coordinates of all data acquisition nodes in this closed-loop
path. A larger gi,jindicates a higher pairing degree between
UAV iand UA V j.F o rU A V i, we can calculate the pairing
degree between UA V iand other UA Vs according to (22), and
select the UA V with the maximum pairing degree to build a
relay pairing relationship with UA V i.
Algorithm 2presents the speciﬁc process of the relay pair-
ing method for UA Vs. PR
idenotes the set of data acquisition
nodes for the closed-loop ﬂight path of UA V i,pBis the
BS point, PS={pS
1,pS
2,..., pS
NA}is the set of closed-loop
centroids.
Fig. 10depicts an example of establishing relay pairing
relationships for UA Vs. As shown in Fig. 10(a), the closed-
loop centroid E is the closest point to the BS among allclosed-loop centroids A, B, C, D, and E. Therefore, UA V
5 corresponding to the centroid E is selected to establish a
Fig. 10. Relay pairing relationships between UA Vs and the BS. (a) Partial
pairing of UA Vs. (b) Final pairing of UA Vs.
relay pairing relationship with the BS. Through this relay
pairing relationship, UA V 5 acts as the near-end UA V and is
in charge for relaying data from other UA Vs. For the closed-loop centroid B, the distance between centroids B and D is
similar to the distance between centroids B and E, but the
centripetal angle θ
4is signiﬁcantly greater than θ3.I nt h i s
case, according to (22), UA V 2 is directly paired with UA V
5. For the closed-loop centroid C, the closed-loop centroids B
and D corresponding to UA V 2 and UA V 4 have the similarcentripetal angle, but the distance between the centroids C
and B is signiﬁcantly smaller than the distance between the
centroids C and D. In this case, according to (22),U A V3i s
directly paired with UA V 2. According to the proposed relay
pairing method, the relay pairing relationship of all UA Vs
can be obtained, as shown in Fig. 10(b). In this relay pairing
relationship, the data from the far-end UA V 1 and UA V 3
reaches the BS via the relay of UA V 2 and UA V 5; the data
from the far-end UA V 4 reaches the BS via the relay of near-
end UA V 5.
E. Flight Path Modiﬁcation of UAVs
After obtaining relay pairing relationships of UA Vs, there
may be a situation where the paired UA Vs cannot establishcommunication. Therefore, we need to further modify the
paths of UA Vs by adding additional communication points.
The path modiﬁcation between the far-end UA V and the near-end UA V is a typical complex problem with huge solution
space. The objective function of this problem is as follows:
--- PAGE 10 ---

REN et al.: COLLABORATIVE DATA ACQUISITION FOR UA V-AIDED IoT BASED ON TIME-BALANCING SCHEDULING 13669
minNA/summationdisplay
i=1NA/summationdisplay
j=1wF
i,j/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingledF
i−dF
j/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle (23)
s.t.pL
i,j,pL
j,i∈lC
i,j (24)
DS≤dC
i,j−/parenleftBig
dF
i,j+dF
j,i/parenrightBig
≤DAA
R (25)
where dF
iis the length of modiﬁed ﬂight path of UA V i;wF
i,jis
the relay pairing relationship between UA Vs iandjobtained
by(22);wF
i,j=1 denotes the data of UA V iis relayed by UA V
j;wF
i,j=0 denotes that there is no relay pairing relationship
between UA V iand UA V j;pL
i,jdenotes the communication
point on the path of UA V ito establish communication with the
paired relay UA V j;pL
j,idenotes the communication point on
the path of UA V jto establish communication with the paired
relay UA V i;lC
i,jdenotes the line generated by connecting
the two points closest to each other on the ﬂight paths of
UAV iand UA V j;dC
i,jis the length of the line lC
i,j;dF
i,jis
the distance between communication point pL
i,jand the closest
data acquisition node on the initial ﬂight path of UA V ifrom
communication point pL
i,j;DSis the minimum safe separation
distance between UA Vs; the objective function (23) is used
to require that the length of the modiﬁed path of each UA V
differs as little as possible from each other and the total
modiﬁed path length of all UA Vs are as short as possible.Meanwhile, according to (24) and(25), the path modiﬁcation
should satisfy that there is no intersection and overlap between
the modiﬁed ﬂight paths of UA Vs, and all UA Vs can conform
to the predeﬁned relay pairing relationship. This problem is
NP-hard. We use GA to solve it. The algorithm’s speciﬁcs areoutlined as follows.
1) Initial Population: The algorithm starts by generating an
initial population of potential solutions using binary coding.Each individual in the population represents a candidate solu-
tion to the problem. Binary coding represents the individuals
represented by different variable values as a distinct binarystring of zeros and ones. To ensure the accuracy of the
solution, we set the solution to be accurate to 2 decimal
places. According to ( 24), the corresponding variable interval
[X
min
i,j,Xmax
i,j]. To satisfy the accuracy of the solution, the
encoded binary string adapts the string length according to the
range of the interval. For this reason, we set the string length
of the binary string to NB
i,j, which should satisfy 2NB
i,j−1<
(Xmax
i,j−Xmin
i,j)102≤2NB
i,j. The binary string of length NB
discretizes the interval into 2NB−1 equal regions, generating
a total of 2NB
i,jdiscrete variables, including both ends of the
interval. We randomly selected NPindividuals from these
discrete variables as the initial population to ensure diversityin the solution space.
2) Selection: Once the initial population is generated, the
selection process identiﬁes individuals for reproduction based
on their ﬁtness. We use an improved roulette selection method
to select individuals (see Section IV-C for details).
3) Crossover: Once the selection phase is completed, the
algorithm moves on to the crossover operation. It involves
combining genetic material from selected individuals to createoffspring. In the case of binary coding, crossover is performed
by exchanging segments between two parent individuals. The
Fig. 11. Path modiﬁcation between UA Vs.
position of the crossover points is determined randomly. Thisexchange of genetic material introduces new combinations,
potentially generating individuals with improved ﬁtness com-pared to their parents.
4) Mutation: Following the crossover operation, the algo-
rithm introduces variation through the mutation process.
Mutation provides a mechanism to introduce small randomchanges in the genetic material of individuals. In the case of
binary coding, mutation involves ﬂipping speciﬁc bits in the
individual’s binary string with a predeﬁned mutation rate. Themutation rate determines the probability of a bit being ﬂipped.
Flipping a binary string means changing the value of a bit from
0 to 1, or vice versa. By introducing these random changes, thealgorithm can explore different regions of the search space and
potentially escape local optima. This mutation process helps
maintain diversity in the population and prevents premature
convergence to suboptimal solutions.
5) Fitness Function and Iteration: After crossover and
variation, the ﬁtness of the offspring individuals is evaluated
using the objective function ( 23). In this context, the ﬁtness
value is deﬁned as the reciprocal of the sum of the distance
differences among all UA V ﬂight paths. A smaller value of
the distance differences indicates a better solution, leading
to a higher ﬁtness value. We repeat the process of selection,
crossover, mutation, and replacement until we have gonethrough a set number of iterative generations.
An example of path modiﬁcation between UA Vs is given
in Fig. 11. Before the path modiﬁcation, the initial ﬂight
path of each UA V cannot effectively support air-to-air data
relay. After the modiﬁcation of the ﬂight paths, the paired
UA Vs can establish reliable communication, while furtherreducing the disparity in ﬂight path lengths. This improvement
is more conducive to the following time-balancing scheduling
operation.
F . Joint Scheduling Scheme of UAVs
To increase the efﬁciency of UA V data delivery by minimiz-
ing hovering time, it is essential to develop a comprehensivescheduling scheme for each UA V . This scheme involves two
essential steps. First, the optimal hovering time for each UA V
must be determined. Second, the take-off point and ﬂightdirection for the closed-loop ﬂight path of each UA V are
determined.
--- PAGE 11 ---

13670 IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 11, NO. 8, 15 APRIL 2024
1) Hovering Time Scheduling: A hovering time scheduling
method is proposed to improve the consistency of the timerequired for each UA V to complete a lap. The method achieves
this by increasing the hovering time of the UA Vs at the
communication point. This method is based on two settings:1) in the case of paired UA Vs, the UA V with the shorter path
length is designated to hover in order to synchronize with the
UA V that has a longer path length and 2) the larger the pathlength difference, the longer the UA V hovering time. Based
on the above settings, for UA Vs iandjthat have established a
relay pairing relationship, the time that UA V iwaits for UA V
jat communication point P
i,jis
tH
i,j=qi,jtD
i (26)
where qi,jis the time allocation ratio, and tD
iis the sum of
the hovering time at each communication point for one lap of
UAV i. The time allocation ratio qi,jcan be calculated by
qi,j=⎧
⎨
⎩wF
i,jtF
i,j/summationtextNA
j=1wF
i,jtF
i,j,/summationtextNA
j=1wF
i,jtF
i,j>0
0, otherwise(27)
tF
i,j=/braceleftBigg
dF
j−dF
i
v,dF
j−dF
i>0
0, otherwise(28)
where tF
i,jis the difference in path length between UA V iand
UAV jfor one lap of ﬂight; vis the ﬂight speed of UA Vs. In
the calculation of tF
i,j, only the case where the path length of
UAV jis greater than the path length of UA V iis regarded. For
other cases, tF
i,ji ss e tt o0s i n c eU A V idoes not need to wait
for UA V j. The sum of hovering time tD
ican be calculated by
tD
i=max 1≤i≤NA/braceleftbig
dF
i/bracerightbig
−dF
i
v. (29)
2) Take-Off Points and Flight Directions of UAVs: After the
hovering time scheduling of UA Vs, the take-off point and ﬂight
direction of each UA V also need to be conﬁgured. Accordingto the hovering time at the communication point, the take-
off point and the ﬂight direction of the far-end UA V need to
satisfy the following constraints: 1) when the UA V takes offfrom the take-off point, it chooses a ﬂight direction that allows
it to acquire as many data packets from the SNs as possible
before reaching the communication point and 2) at the end ofthe hovering time, the UA V has the ability to deliver data to
another UA V that has an established relay pairing relationship.
In order to generate take-off points and ﬂight directions
that can satisfy all the above conditions, a diffusive direction
selection method is proposed. The basic idea of this method
is to take the BS as the center, and ﬁrst conﬁrm the take-off points and ﬂight directions of UA Vs near the BS, and
gradually extend outward to determine the take-off points and
ﬂight directions of the remaining UA Vs based on the relay
pairing relationships. For ease of understanding, the details
of this method are presented in Algorithm 3.t
P
idenotes the
time consumed by UA V ito reach the communication point
from the set take-off point in the set ﬂight direction; pT
i
denotes the take-off point of UA V i;pFD
iandpRD
idenote the
candidate take-off points for UA V iin the forward and reverse
ﬂight directions, respectively; nFD
idenotes the number of dataAlgorithm 3 Diffusive Direction Selection Method
Input: the set of data acquisition nodes PR,t h es e to fh o v e r i n g
time for communication points TH={tH
i,j,..., tH
j,i},t h es e to f
communication points PL={pL
i,j,..., pL
j,i}
Output: The set of take-off points for UA Vs PT=
{pT
1,pT
2···pT
NA}, ﬂight directions of UA Vs
1:foreach pL
i,jinPLdo
2: ifpL
i,jcan communicate directly with the base
station then
3: pT
i←pL
i,j
4: Select the direction that takes longer to reach
pLmax
ifrom pT
ias the ﬂight direction in both
forward and reverse directions.
5: pTEM←pL
i,j;pEND←pL
i,j
6: while return to pEND do
7: Move from pTEM in the current closed-loop
path where pTEM is located in the set ﬂight
direction until you reach pL
i,korpEND
8: Update tP
i
9: ifthe closed-loop path where pL
k,iis located
is not set take-off point and ﬂight direction
of UA V kthen
10: From pL
k,itakes time tP
i+tH
i,k−tH
k,ito
move in reverse and forward direction
directions to get pFD
kandpRD
k
11: ifnFD
k≥nRD
kthen
12: pTk←pFD
k;s e tU A V kto ﬂy in
forward direction
13: else
14: pT
k←pRD
k;s e tU A V kto ﬂy in
reverse direction
15: end if
16: pTEM←pL
k,i
17: else
18: pTEM←pL
k,i
19: end if
20: end while
21: end if
22:end for
23:return PT, ﬂight directions of UA Vs
packets from SNs that the UA V iacquires in forward ﬂight
direction from pFD
itopL
k,i; and nRD
idenotes the number of data
packets from SNs that the UA V iacquires in reverse ﬂight
direction from pRD
itopL
k,i.
After setting the take-off point, ﬂight direction, and hovering
time of each UA V , we can get the joint scheduling plan
including the joint path planning and joint time scheduling.
An example of the joint scheduling plan of UA Vs is shown
in Fig. 12. The joint path planning of UA Vs is shown in
Fig. 12(a), UA V 2 takes off from the take-off point P 1,a r r i v e s
at the communication point P 2and then hovers to wait for
UA V 1. UA V 1 takes off from the take-off point P 3, follows
reverse ﬂight direction to the communication point P 4, and
delivers data to UA V 2. UA V 2 continues to move after
receiving data from UA V 1 and receives data from UA V 3
--- PAGE 12 ---

REN et al.: COLLABORATIVE DATA ACQUISITION FOR UA V-AIDED IoT BASED ON TIME-BALANCING SCHEDULING 13671
Fig. 12. Joint scheduling plan of UA Vs. (a) Joint path planning of UA Vs. (b) Time scheduling of UA Vs. (c) Air-to-air data relay path for each subnet.
when it reaches the communication point P 5. Then, UA V 2
delivers data to UA V 5 at the communication point P 8. Finally,
UA V 5 sends the data to the BS when it returns to the
communication point P 9.F i g . 12(b) gives the time scheduling
of UA Vs. By adjusting the hovering time of each UA V , all
UA Vs take the same amount of time to ﬂy one lap and
complete the data relay as scheduled. After completing thejoint path planning and joint time scheduling of UA Vs, the
air-to-air data relay path for each subnet can be conﬁrmed,
which is shown in Fig. 12(c).
G. Complexity Analysis
In the TSDA scheme, we ﬁrst select data acquisition nodes
and generate the initial ﬂight path of UA Vs by using the
GA. For a sensor network divided into N
Csubnets, the
computational complexity of applying the GA with popu-
lation size NPforNIiterations to solve this problem is
O(NPNINANC). After that, the generated initial ﬂight path is
modiﬁed according to the relay pairing relationship between
UA Vs. We also use the GA to solve this extreme-value
problem. We still set the population size to NPand the
number of iterations to NI. The computational complexity
of the GA is O(NPNINA). Finally, the take-off point and
ﬂight direction of each UA V are determined by the joint
scheduling scheme of UA Vs. The computational complexity
of the proposed algorithm is O(N2
Alog(NA)). According to
the above analysis, the total computational complexity of
the TSDA scheme is O(NPNINANC+NPNINA+N2
Alog(NA)),
which is equivalent to O(NPNINANC). The proposed TSDA
scheme has a reasonable level of computational complexity,
ensuring that it does not place an excessive burden on softwareTABLE II
PARAMETER SETTINGS OF GA
and hardware resources. By leveraging ofﬂine calculations on
the server at the BS, users have the capability to generate
optimal ﬂight paths for the UA Vs and upload them in advancebefore commencing their data acquisition tasks. This facili-
tates efﬁcient planning and execution of UA V tasks for data
acquisition.
V. E
XPERIMENTAL RESULTS
A. Experimental Setup
We executed a series of simulations by using MATLAB
2021b running on a platform with 128G RAM, one NvidiaQuadro RTX 5000 and one Intel Xeon Gold 6230R CPU
@2.10 GHz with 26 cores. In the experiment, 300 SNs are
randomly deployed within a 1000 m ×1000 m region. The
location of the BS is set to (1000, 500) m. The communication
channel parameters are set according to the reference worksin[57] and[58]. We use GA to generate the initial ﬂight
paths and modiﬁed ﬂight paths of UA Vs. The recommended
parameters to set the GA [51] are shown in Table II, while
all simulation parameters are presented in Table IIIunless
otherwise speciﬁed.
--- PAGE 13 ---

13672 IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 11, NO. 8, 15 APRIL 2024
TABLE III
SIMULATION PARAMETERS
Fig. 13. Heatmap of the average system AoI varying number of UA Vs andcentripetal weight (N
C=30).
B. Parameter Analysis
Fig. 13shows the heatmap of the average AoI varying the
number of UA Vs and centripetal weight α. In the case where
the number of deployed UA Vs is relatively small (NA=3),t h e
centripetal weight value has little effect on the average system
AoI. As the number of UA Vs rises, the effect of centripetal
weight tends to be more evident. We can easily observe arecommended conﬁguration parameter space. In this parameter
space, the average system AoI tends to be optimum. Based on
the above observations, the centripetal weight is set to 0.6 inthe subsequent experiments.
Fig. 14shows the generation process of UA V ﬂight paths
under the TSDA scheme. Fig. 14(a) depicts the initial ﬂight
paths. The initial paths can traverse all subnets and the
closed-loop ﬂight path length of each UA V is approximated.Fig. 14(b) shows the modiﬁed ﬂight paths according to the
centripetal-based relay pairing method. The modiﬁed path
ensures that communication can be established between thepaired UA Vs and that the message delivery direction is directed
to the BS. As shown in Fig. 14(c), after determining the
Fig. 14. Generation process of UA V ﬂight paths under TSDA scheme (NA=
5,NC=30). (a) Initial ﬂight path. (b) Modiﬁed path. (c) Final ﬂight path.
take-off points and ﬂight directions of UA Vs, the collabora-
tive data acquisition model is further improved by the joint
scheduling scheme.
From Fig. 15, we can clearly observe that for the relatively
small network size (NC=20), the generated ﬂight path
length of UA Vs is short, and a low average system AoIcan be obtained. With the rise of N
C, although the path
modiﬁcation of UA Vs can become more ﬂexible, the ﬂight
path length required for UA Vs to traverse all subnets increases
signiﬁcantly, resulting in a signiﬁcant increase in the average
system AoI.
Fig.16illustrates the variation in the average system AoI as
the number of UA Vs changes. We can easily observe that to
understand that along with the increasing number of UA Vs, thedata acquisition task assigned to each UA V is correspondingly
reduced and is more conducive to data relay from far-end UA V .
--- PAGE 14 ---

REN et al.: COLLABORATIVE DATA ACQUISITION FOR UA V-AIDED IoT BASED ON TIME-BALANCING SCHEDULING 13673
Fig. 15. Average system AoI varying number of subnets (NA=5).
Fig. 16. Average system AoI varying number of UA Vs (NC=30).
Fig. 17. Average system AoI with/without joint scheduling (NC=30).
From Fig. 17, we can easily observe that along with the
increasing number of UA Vs, the average system AoI decreases
signiﬁcantly in the case with joint scheduling. In contrast,in the absence of joint scheduling, the average system AoI
remains at a high level as the number of UA Vs increases.
Fig.18presents the time states of each UA V in the two cases
(i.e., with and without joint scheduling). We can ﬁnd that the
hovering time consumed by the UA Vs during the air-to-air data
relaying process is signiﬁcantly reduced after using the jointscheduling scheme compared to that without it, thus being
able to complete one round of data acquisition in less time.
This result also reasonably explains the reason why using the
joint scheduling scheme can signiﬁcantly reduce the average
system AoI.
C. Performance Comparison
To evaluate the effectiveness of the TSDA scheme, we
selected the multiclosed-loop path data acquisition (MCDA)
scheme [27], the multitrip path data acquisition (MTDA)
Fig. 18. Time states of each UA V with/without joint scheduling (NA=5,
NC=30). (a) With joint scheduling scheme. (b) Without joint scheduling
scheme.
scheme [30], and the AoI-aware data acquisition scheme
(ADC) [36] as the comparison algorithms. MCDA and MTDA
are the most classic UA V-aided IoT data acquisition schemes;
in particular, the MCDA scheme uses a one-way ﬂight closed-
loop path and the MTDA scheme uses a round-trip ﬂight foldpath. These two schemes focus on optimizing the ﬂight path
of each UA V to improve data acquisition efﬁciency. The ADC
scheme is the UA V-aided IoT collaborative data acquisitionscheme proposed in our previous research work [36].T h e
ADC scheme achieves data relay among UA Vs by constructing
Hamiltonian paths.
Fig.19presents the AoI heatmap in the four data acquisition
schemes. The color of the region in the ﬁgure represents the
AoI value of the region. In the TSDA and ADC scheme,the far-end UA V does not required to ﬂy to the BS through
the air-to-air data relay. However, in the ADC scheme, a UA V
is only allowed to establish a relay pairing with one UA V(i.e., one-to-one data relay). In the TSDA scheme, one UA V is
allowed to establish pairing relationships with multiple UA Vs,
which makes the UA V more ﬂexible and efﬁcient in air-to-
air data relaying. In both MCDA and MTDA schemes, UA Vs
are required to move to marginal regions to ﬁnalize dataacquisition after accomplishing the task in the nearby region
of the BS. Unlike the TSDA scheme, these two schemes
involve UA V ﬂight paths covering a broader area, resulting inincreased data delivery latency and signiﬁcantly higher AoI
values for SNs.
--- PAGE 15 ---

13674 IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 11, NO. 8, 15 APRIL 2024
Fig. 19. AoI heatmap generated by four data acquisition schemes (NA=5,NC=30). (a) TSDA scheme. (b) ADC scheme. (c) MCDA scheme. (d) MTDA
scheme.
Fig. 20. AoI distribution of SNs generated by four data acquisition schemes (NA=5).( a ) NC=30. (b) NC=40. (c) NC=50.
In order to further explore the data acquisition performance
of the four data acquisition schemes in terms of AoI, weconducted statistics on the AoI distribution of the SNs in
the sensor network. By observing Fig. 20, we can ﬁnd that
the AoI distribution of SNs under the TSDA scheme exhibits
signiﬁcant improvements compared to the other three schemes.
Taking the scenario with N
C=30 as an example, the AoI
values of SNs under TSDA are mostly distributed in the range
of [165, 230]. In contrast, the AoI values of SNs under ADC,
MCDA, and MTDA are mainly distributed in the ranges of[159, 272], [170, 270], and [248, 325], respectively.
A ss h o w ni nF i g . 21, compared with ADC, MCDA, and
MTDA, the average system AoI obtained from the TSDAscheme is signiﬁcantly better than that of these three schemes.
Speciﬁcally, it outperforms these three schemes by 14%, 23%,
and 35%, respectively. The performance advantage of theTSDA scheme is more prominent with the expansion of the
network size. In the case where the network size is relatively
small (N
C=30), the UA Vs do not need to perform air-to-air
data relay to achieve efﬁcient data acquisition. In this case,
the performance difference between the four schemes is notFig. 21. Comparison of four data acquisition schemes in terms of average
system AoI (NA=5).
evident. With the expansion of the network size, the ﬂight
paths required for UA Vs to traverse each data acquisition node
grow signiﬁcantly. In this scenario, the collaborative relayadvantages of both TSDA and ADC schemes can be fully
utilized. Compared to the ADC scheme that only supports
--- PAGE 16 ---

REN et al.: COLLABORATIVE DATA ACQUISITION FOR UA V-AIDED IoT BASED ON TIME-BALANCING SCHEDULING 13675
one-to-one data relay, the relay pairing strategy of the TSDA
scheme enables UA Vs to participate in data forwarding tasksmore ﬂexibly, thereby further reducing the average system
AoI.
VI. C
ONCLUSION
In this work, we have developed a collaborative data
acquisition model that utilizes collaborative data relay amongUA Vs to reduce data delivery latency. Building upon the
proposed model, we introduce a TSDA scheme as a solution.
Extensive experimental results have shown that the proposedTSDA scheme can signiﬁcantly reduce the average AoI of the
system compared with existing data acquisition schemes. In
addition, the advantages of collaborative relaying of the TSDAscheme can be better exploited as the network size increases;
moreover, the hovering time of UA Vs can be signiﬁcantly
reduced after applying such joint scheduling scheme. We
mainly focus on the air-to-air relaying problem of UA Vs in
UA V-aided IoT systems in obstacle-free scenarios. In the nextstep of our work, we focus on the multi-UA V data relaying
problem in an obstacle environment. How to ensure safe
obstacle avoidance of UA Vs while achieving efﬁcient datarelaying was the major challenge.
R
EFERENCES
[1] C. Savaglio and G. Fortino, “A simulation-driven methodology for IoT
data mining based on edge computing,” ACM Trans. Internet Technol. ,
vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 1–22, 2021.
[2] G. Fortino, C. Savaglio, G. Spezzano, and M. Zhou, “Internet of
Things as system of systems: A review of methodologies, frameworks,platforms, and tools,” IEEE Trans. Syst., Man, Cybern., Syst. , vol. 51,
no. 1, pp. 223–236, Jan. 2021.
[3] G. Fortino, W. Russo, C. Savaglio, W. Shen, and M. Zhou, “Agent-
oriented cooperative smart objects: From IoT system design to
implementation,” IEEE Trans. Syst., Man, Cybern., Syst. , vol. 48, no. 11,
pp. 1939–1956, Dec. 2017.
[4] H. Ko and S. Pack, “Distributed device-to-device ofﬂoading system:
Design and performance optimization,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput. ,
vol. 20, no. 10, pp. 2949–2960, Oct. 2021.
[5] H. Ko, S. Pack, and V . C. Leung, “Performance optimization of
serverless computing for latency-guaranteed and energy-efﬁcient taskofﬂoading in energy harvesting Industrial IoT,” IEEE Internet Things J. ,
vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 1897–1907, Feb. 2023.
[6] G. K. Verma, B. Singh, N. Kumar, M. S. Obaidat, D. He, and H. Singh,
“An efﬁcient and provable certiﬁcate-based proxy signature scheme forIIoT environment,” Inf. Sci. , vol. 518, pp. 142–156, May 2020.
[7] G. Xiong et al., “From mind to products: Towards social manufacturing
and service,” IEEE/CAA J. Automatica Sinica , vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 47–57,
Jan. 2018.
[8] A. Hazra, P. K. Donta, T. Amgoth, and S. Dustdar, “Cooperative
transmission scheduling and computation ofﬂoading with collaborationof fog and cloud for Industrial IoT applications,” IEEE Internet Things
J., vol. 10, no. 5, pp. 3944–3953, Mar. 2023.
[9] G. Aloi, G. Fortino, R. Gravina, P. Pace, and C. Savaglio, “Simulation-
driven platform for edge-based AAL systems,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas
Commun. , vol. 39, no. 2, pp. 446–462, Sep. 2020.
[10] G. Horn et al., “An architecture for using commodity devices and smart
phones in health systems,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Comput. Commun.
(ISCC) , 2016, pp. 255–260.
[11] J. Zhang, Y . Wang, S. Li, and S. Shi, “An architecture for IoT-enabled
smart transportation security system: A geospatial approach,” IEEE
Internet Things J. , vol. 8, no. 8, pp. 6205–6213, Apr. 2021.
[12] S. Han, K. Zhu, M. Zhou, and X. Liu, “Joint deployment optimization
and ﬂight trajectory planning for UA V assisted IoT data collection: Abilevel optimization approach,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. , vol. 23,
no. 11, pp. 21492–21504, Nov. 2022.[13] N. Agrawal, A. Bansal, K. Singh, C.-P. Li, and S. Mumtaz, “Finite block
length analysis of RIS-assisted UA V-based multiuser IoT communicationsystem with non-linear EH,” IEEE Trans. Commun. , vol. 70, no. 5,
pp. 3542–3557, May 2022.
[14] Z. Wei et al., “UA V-assisted data collection for Internet of Things:
As u r v e y , ” IEEE Internet Things J. , vol. 9, no. 17, pp. 15460–15483,
Sep. 2022.
[15] S. F. Abedin, M. S. Munir, N. H. Tran, Z. Han, and C. S. Hong,
“Data freshness and energy-efﬁcient UA V navigation optimization: A
deep reinforcement learning approach,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. ,
vol. 22, no. 9, pp. 5994–6006, Sep. 2021.
[16] H. Hu, K. Xiong, G. Qu, Q. Ni, P. Fan, and K. B. Letaief, “AoI-minimal
trajectory planning and data collection in UA V-assisted wireless poweredIoT networks,” IEEE Internet Things J. , vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 1211–1223,
Jan. 2021.
[17] M. A. Abd-Elmagid and H. S. Dhillon, “Average peak age-of-
information minimization in UA V-assisted IoT networks,” IEEE Trans.
Veh. Technol. , vol. 68, no. 2, pp. 2003–2008, Feb. 2018.
[18] P. Tong, J. Liu, X. Wang, B. Bai, and H. Dai, “UA V-enabled age-optimal
data collection in wireless sensor networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Commun. Workshops (ICC Workshops) , 2019, pp. 1–6.
[19] J. Liu, X. Wang, B. Bai, and H. Dai, “Age-optimal trajectory planning for
UA V-assisted data collection,” in Proc. IEEE INFOCOM Conf. Comput.
Commun.Workshops (INFOCOM WKSHPS) , 2018, pp. 553–558.
[20] M. A. Abd-Elmagid, A. Ferdowsi, H. S. Dhillon, and W. Saad,
“Deep reinforcement learning for minimizing age-of-information in
UA V-assisted networks,” in Proc. IEEE Global Commun. Conf.
(GLOBECOM) , 2019, pp. 1–6.
[21] G. Ahani, D. Yuan, and Y . Zhao, “Age-optimal UA V scheduling for data
collection with battery recharging,” IEEE Commun. Lett. , vol. 25, no. 4,
pp. 1254–1258, Apr. 2021.
[22] M. Yi, X. Wang, J. Liu, Y . Zhang, and B. Bai, “Deep reinforcement
learning for fresh data collection in UA V-assisted IoT networks,” inProc. IEEE INFOCOM Conf. Comput. Commun. Workshops (INFOCOM
WKSHPS) , 2020, pp. 716–721.
[23] P. Tong, J. Liu, X. Wang, B. Bai, and H. Dai, “Deep reinforcement
learning for efﬁcient data collection in UA V-aided Internet of Things,”
inProc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. Workshops (ICC Workshops) , 2020,
pp. 1–6.
[24] J. Liu, P. Tong, X. Wang, B. Bai, and H. Dai, “UA V-aided data collection
for information freshness in wireless sensor networks,” IEEE Trans.
Wireless Commun. , vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 2368–2382, Apr. 2021.
[25] Z. Jia, X. Qin, Z. Wang, and B. Liu, “Age-based path planning and
data acquisition in UA V-assisted IoT networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Commun. Workshops (ICC Workshops) , 2019, pp. 1–6.
[26] A. Ferdowsi, M. A. Abd-Elmagid, W. Saad, and H. S. Dhillon,
“Neural combinatorial deep reinforcement learning for age-optimal joint
trajectory and scheduling design in UA V-assisted networks,” IEEE J. Sel.
Areas Commun. , vol. 39, no. 5, pp. 1250–1265, May 2021.
[27] Y . Wang, Z. Hu, X. Wen, Z. Lu, and J. Miao, “Minimizing data
collection time with collaborative UA Vs in wireless sensor networks,”IEEE Access , vol. 8, pp. 98659–98669, 2020.
[28] Z. Li, P. Tong, J. Liu, X. Wang, L. Xie, and H. Dai, “Learning-based
data gathering for information freshness in UA V-assisted IoT networks,”IEEE Internet Things J. , vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 2557–2573, Feb. 2023.
[29] L. Deng et al., “Completion time minimization for multi-antenna UA V-
enabled data collection in uncorrelated Rician fading,” Veh. Commun. ,
vol. 37, Oct. 2022, Art. no. 100501.
[30] C. Xu, M. Xu, and C. Yin, “Optimized multi-UA V cooperative path plan-
ning under the complex confrontation environment,” Comput. Commun. ,
vol. 162, pp. 196–203, Oct. 2020.
[31] B. Zhu, E. Bedeer, H. H. Nguyen, R. Barton, and Z. Gao, “UA V
trajectory planning for AoI-minimal data collection in UA V-aided IoTnetworks by transformer,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun. , vol. 22, no. 2,
pp. 1343–1358, Feb. 2023.
[32] O. S. Oubbati, M. Atiquzzaman, H. Lim, A. Rachedi, and A. Lakas,
“Synchronizing UA V teams for timely data collection and energy transfer
by deep reinforcement learning,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol. , vol. 71,
no. 6, pp. 6682–6697, Jun. 2022.
[33] Y . Liao and V . Friderikos, “Energy and age Pareto optimal trajectories
in UA V-assisted wireless data collection,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol. ,
vol. 71, no. 8, pp. 9101–9106, Aug. 2022.
[34] L. Liu, K. Xiong, J. Cao, Y . Lu, P. Fan, and K. B. Letaief, “Average AoI
minimization in UA V-assisted data collection with RF wireless powertransfer: A deep reinforcement learning scheme,” IEEE Internet Things
J., vol. 9, no. 7, pp. 5216–5228, Apr. 2022.
--- PAGE 17 ---

13676 IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 11, NO. 8, 15 APRIL 2024
[35] T. Wu et al., “A novel AI-based framework for AoI-optimal trajec-
tory planning in UA V-assisted wireless sensor networks,” IEEE Trans.
Wireless Commun. , vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 2462–2475, Apr. 2022.
[36] X. Huang and X. Fu, “Fresh data collection for UA V-assisted IoTs
based on aerial collaborative relay,” IEEE Sensors J. , vol. 23, no. 8,
pp. 8810–8825, Apr. 2023.
[37] D. Yin, X. Yang, H. Yu, S. Chen, and C. Wang, “An air-to-ground relay
communication planning method for UA Vs swarm applications,” IEEE
Trans. Intell. Veh. , vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 2983–2997, Apr. 2023.
[38] R. Han, J. Wang, L. Bai, J. Liu, and J. Choi, “Age of information and
performance analysis for UA V-aided IoT systems,” IEEE Internet Things
J., vol. 8, no. 19, pp. 14447–14457, Oct. 2021.
[39] M. Sun, X. Xu, X. Qin, and P. Zhang, “AoI-energy-aware UA V-
assisted data collection for IoT networks: A deep reinforcement learningmethod,” IEEE Internet Things J. , vol. 8, no. 24, pp. 17275–17289,
Dec. 2021.
[40] S. Kaul, R. Yates, and M. Gruteser, “Real-time status: How often should
one update?” in Proc. IEEE INFOCOM , 2012, pp. 2731–2735.
[41] L. A. B. Burhanuddin, X. Liu, Y . Deng, U. Challita, and A. Zahemszky,
“QoE optimization for live video streaming in UA V-to-UA V commu-
nications via deep reinforcement learning,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol. ,
vol. 71, no. 5, pp. 5358–5370, May 2022.
[42] A. Al-Hourani, S. Kandeepan, and S. Lardner, “Optimal LAP altitude
for maximum coverage,” IEEE Wireless Commun. Lett. , vol. 3, no. 6,
pp. 569–572, Dec. 2014.
[43] H. Nawaz, H. M. Ali, and A. A. Laghari, “UA V communication networks
issues: A review,” Archives Comput. Methods Eng. , vol. 28, no. 3,
pp. 1349–1369, 2021.
[44] S. Zhang, H. Zhang, B. Di, and L. Song, “Cellular UA V-to-X communi-
cations: Design and optimization for multi-UA V networks,” IEEE Trans.
Wireless Commun. , vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 1346–1359, Feb. 2019.
[45] X. Liu et al., “Deployment of UA V-BSs for on-demand full communi-
cation coverage,” Ad Hoc Netw. , vol. 140, Mar. 2023, Art. no. 103047.
[46] D. Yang, Q. Wu, Y . Zeng, and R. Zhang, “Energy tradeoff in ground-to-
UA V communication via trajectory design,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol. ,
vol. 67, no. 7, pp. 6721–6726, Jul. 2018.
[47] S. Ahmed, M. Z. Chowdhury, and Y . M. Jang, “Energy-efﬁcient UA V
relaying communications to serve ground nodes,” IEEE Commun. Lett. ,
vol. 24, no. 4, pp. 849–852, Apr. 2020.[48] J. Bi, H. Yuan, S. Duanmu, M. Zhou, and A. Abusorrah,
“Energy-optimized partial computation ofﬂoading in mobile-edgecomputing with genetic simulated-annealing-based particle swarmoptimization,” IEEE Internet Things J. , vol. 8, no. 5, pp. 3774–3785,
Mar. 2021.
[49] J. Bi, H. Yuan, J. Zhai, M. Zhou, and H. V . Poor, “Self-adaptive BAT
algorithm with genetic operations,” IEEE/CAA J. Automatica Sinica ,
vol. 9, no. 7, pp. 1284–1294, Jul. 2022.
[50] J. Bi, H. Yuan, K. Zhang, and M. Zhou, “Energy-minimized partial
computation ofﬂoading for delay-sensitive applications in heterogeneousedge networks,” IEEE Trans. Emerg. Topics Comput. , vol. 10, no. 4,
pp. 1941–1954, Oct.–Dec. 2022.
[51] S. Gao, M. Zhou, Y . Wang, J. Cheng, H. Yachi, and J. Wang, “Dendritic
neuron model with effective learning algorithms for classiﬁcation,approximation, and prediction,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst. ,
vol. 30, no. 2, pp. 601–614, Feb. 2019.
[52] P. Zhang, S. Shu, and M. Zhou, “An online fault detection method based
on SVM-grid for cloud computing systems,” IEEE/CAA J. Automatica
Sinica , vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 445–456, May 2018.
[53] X. Luo, Y . Zhou, Z. Liu, L. Hu, and M. Zhou, “Generalized Nesterov’s
acceleration-incorporated, non-negative and adaptive latent factor anal-ysis,” IEEE Trans. Services Comput. , vol. 15, no. 5, pp. 2809–2823,
Sep./Oct. 2022.
[54] H. Zhou, M. Song, and W. Pedrycz, “A comparative study of improved
GA and PSO in solving multiple traveling salesmen problem,” Appl.
Soft Comput. , vol. 64, pp. 564–580, Mar. 2018.
[55] Z. Wang, X. Fang, H. Li, and H. Jin, “An improved partheno-genetic
algorithm with reproduction mechanism for the multiple travel-
ing salesperson problem,” IEEE Access , vol. 8, pp. 102607–102615,
2020.
[56] Q. Pan and X. Fu, “Fresh data collection for UA V-assisted IoTs based on
proximity-remote region collaboration,” Ad Hoc Netw. , vol. 146, no. 21,
2023, Art. no. 103182.
[57] A. Al-Hourani, S. Kandeepan, and A. Jamalipour, “Modeling air-to-
ground path loss for low altitude platforms in urban environments,” in
Proc. IEEE Global Commun. Conf. , 2014, pp. 2898–2904.
[58] M. Mozaffari, W. Saad, M. Bennis, and M. Debbah, “Drone small cells
in the clouds: Design, deployment and performance analysis,” in Proc.
IEEE Global Commun. Conf. (GLOBECOM) , 2015, pp. 1–6.
Open Access funding provided by ‘Università della Calabria’ within the CRUI CARE Agreement