--- PAGE 1 ---

IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 10, NO. 9, 1 MAY 2023 8185
Deep Reinforcement Learning for Trajectory
Path Planning and Distributed Inference in
Resource-Constrained UA V Swarms
Marwan Dhuheir , Emna Baccour , Aiman Erbad ,Senior Member, IEEE , Sinan Sabeeh Al-Obaidi ,
and Mounir Hamdi ,Fellow, IEEE
Abstract —The deployment ﬂexibility and maneuverability of
unmanned aerial vehicles (UA Vs) increased their adoption invarious applications, such as wildﬁre tracking, border monitor-ing, etc. In many critical applications, UA Vs capture images andother sensory data and then send the captured data to remote
servers for inference and data processing tasks. However, this
approach is not always practical in real-time applications dueto the connection instability, limited bandwidth, and end-to-endlatency. One promising solution is to divide the inference requestsinto multiple parts (layers or segments), with each part beingexecuted in a different UA V based on the available resources.Furthermore, some applications require the UA Vs to traversecertain areas and capture incidents; thus, planning their pathsbecomes critical particularly, to reduce the latency of making thecollaborative inference process. Speciﬁcally, planning the UA Vstrajectory can reduce the data transmission latency by commu-nicating with devices in the same proximity while mitigating thetransmission interference. This work aims to design a model fordistributed collaborative inference requests and path planning ina UA V swarm while respecting the resource constraints due to thecomputational load and memory usage of the inference requests.The model is formulated as an optimization problem and aims tominimize latency. The formulated problem is NP-hard so ﬁndingthe optimal solution is quite complex; thus, this article intro-duces a real-time and dynamic solution for online applicationsusing deep reinforcement learning. We conduct extensive sim-ulations and compare our results to the state-of-the-art studiesdemonstrating that our model outperforms the competing models.
Index Terms —Classiﬁcation decision, convolutional neural
networks (CNNs), distributed inference, latency, optimization,path planning, unmanned aerial vehicles (UA Vs).
I. I NTRODUCTION
RECENTLY, unmanned aerial vehicles (UA Vs) have been
widely used in various applications ranging from surveil-
lance [ 1], search and rescue operations [ 2], and goods deliv-
ery [ 3] to face detection [ 4], delivery of wireless services [ 5],
Manuscript received 8 July 2022; revised 15 October 2022; accepted
9 December 2022. Date of publication 28 December 2022; date of currentversion 25 April 2023. This work was supported by NPRP-Standard (NPRPS)13th Cycle from the Qatar National Research Fund under Grant NPRP13S-
0205-200265. (Corresponding author: Aiman Erbad.)
Marwan Dhuheir, Emna Baccour, Aiman Erbad, and Mounir Hamdi are
with the College of Science and Engineering, Hamad Bin Khalifa University,Doha, Qatar (e-mail: madh28916@hbku.edu.qa; ebaccourepbesaid@
hbku.edu.qa; aerbad@hbku.edu.qa; mhamdi@hbku.edu.qa).
Sinan Sabeeh Al-Obaidi is with the Research and Development Engineering
Department, Barzan Holdings QSTP LLC, Doha, Qatar (e-mail: ssabeeh@
me.com).
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/JIOT.2022.3231341and precision agriculture [ 6], which highly aroused the
attention of researchers and manufacturers. UA Vs outperformtraditional technologies in terms of many factors, such as high
maneuverability, low cost, easy control system designing, and
monitoring from low-level altitudes [ 7]. Speciﬁcally, UA Vs can
provide architecture ﬂexibility as their system conﬁguration is
easy, making UA Vs an alternative in applications like recon-
naissance missions. In addition, the ease of directing UA Vs,monitoring from low-level altitudes, and capturing data from
different angles give them the advantage of being used in areas
that are difﬁcult to reach by traditional methods.
Some UA V applications require more than one device to
accomplish their mission with high accuracy. Furthermore, astasks become more complicated, such as tracking an object on
the ground, it becomes challenging for a single UA V to capture
high-resolution images and process them due to the limitedcapabilities (including computational capacity and memory
usage). Hence, a swarm of UA Vs is required in order to allow
devices to collaborate in achieving a speciﬁc goal. Multi-UA V-based applications have started to appear in a plethora
of applications, such as oil/gas offshore inspection, delivering
wireless communication in more dense areas, military-basedoperations, and delivering Covid-19 vaccine [ 6]. One critical
application of UA Vs is surveillance and monitoring an area
for many purposes, such as forest ﬁre detection, border mon-itoring, and collecting data from a disaster scene. Moreover,
a swarm of UA Vs can handle more complex operations effec-
tively. In particular, all UA Vs collaborate to achieve the mis-
sion. Unlike satellites capturing images from the ground, the
UA V-enabled surveillance systems can capture high-resolutionpictures that are more practical for classiﬁcation tasks [ 8].
Deep neural networks (DNNs), which are employed in
computer vision to analyze data collected by UA Vs, have sig-niﬁcantly improved in recent years [ 2]. Moreover, DNNs have
become a state-of-the-art solution for image classiﬁcation and
recognition [ 9], [10]. Although DNN has accomplished signif-
icant improvements in complicated UA V missions, one UA V
cannot execute the DNN model onboard due to its resource
constraints, which leads to impractical execution time [ 11].
In fact, these DNN networks consist of millions of neu-
rons and billions of connections and consume large amount
of resources to process the required inferences, and oneUA V cannot accomplish the mission with minimum latency.
Existing works tried to reduce the DNN network size, but
2327-4662 c/circlecopyrt2022 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Hanoi University of Science & Technology. Downloaded on March 12,2026 at 08:24:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- PAGE 2 ---

8186 IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 10, NO. 9, 1 MAY 2023
the accuracy was affected. Hence, distributed inference in
multi-UA Vs is a promising solution to utilize DNN networkslocally. In other words, the complete process is achieved
onboard without resorting to remote servers. In order to over-
come the resource-constrained problem, the DNN model ispartitioned into various parts/tasks, and each task is assigned to
one UA V in the swarm. Each UA V executes its dedicated task
and shares the output with the next participant until obtainingthe ﬁnal prediction [ 12], [13]. However, working with UA Vs
to accomplish a mission adds a complexity of mobility and
interference, represented by the data rates and the distancebetween devices. Previous works did not consider studying the
UA Vs’ trajectory path and its effect on the latency of making
the ﬁnal prediction. Furthermore, doing in-site classiﬁcation by
moving devices exposed to path loss, interference, and possi-
ble disconnection has not been investigated in the literature.As a result, to allow deep neural to be processed in UA V
systems, the DNN distribution should be designed to consider
the hardware and physical limits, as same as intended UA Vspath planning and latency of decision making, which is one
of our aims in this article.
Planning the UA Vs’ trajectory is crucial in surveillance-
based applications to mitigate interference and improve the
overall system performance. Different applications are studied
where the UA V track is planned while executing a mission.Chang et al. [ 14] and Jeong et al. [ 15]u s e dU A V st op r o v i d e
computation ofﬂoading to user elements (UEs) on the ground
while trajectories are planned to cover speciﬁc users. The workin [14] focused on designing the UA Vs’ trajectory to collect
data from the Internet of Things (IoT) devices. Our model
involves planning the UA Vs’ trajectory in surveillance-based
applications and collaborative image processing. In this con-
text, we plan the route of the UA Vs by dividing the surveyedarea into equal-spaced cells, and we assume that each UA V
covers one cell in the same time slot. Participants’ mobility
affects the latency of calculating the joint image classiﬁcationdecisions. In particular, when participants are close to each
other, the interference increases, which affects data transmis-
sion. On the other hand, when UA Vs are too far away, thelatency to exchange data becomes very high, which makes
the inference distribution not practical. To summarize, the dis-
tance between cooperating UA Vs should be well planned toexecute the inference request with minimum latency and low
interference.
In this article, we study the deployment of convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) within a surveillance UA V system.
We build a collaborative strategy that distributes the com-
putation of different CNN layers into multiple UA V devices.Particularly, the complete CNN is divided into parts/tasks, and
these parts are distributed to be computed in the connected
UA Vs, aiming to minimize the latency while considering the
resource constraints and the distance between participants.
Particularly, if any participant runs out of resources, it del-egates the subsequent layer to the next UA V to execute it.
In addition, the trajectory of UA Vs is planned to control the
distance between UA Vs, which highly impacts data trans-mission and consequently impacts the optimal placement of
layers within UA Vs. During this distribution, the UA Vs may berequested to visit predeﬁned hot cells. We validate our model
by considering different CNN networks and different resourcecapacities of participants. To the best of our knowledge, we
believe that our work is the ﬁrst to plan UA Vs’ trajectory to
assist a CNN distribution. The contributions of this article arestated as follows.
1) We introduce a system model consisting of a swarm of
UA Vs capturing images and feeding them to the CNNmodel for image classiﬁcation. The main objective is to
minimize the time of making the ﬁnal classiﬁcation deci-
sion by planning their trajectory. The connected UA Vscollaborate to reduce the ﬁnal classiﬁcation latency and
ﬁnish the online requests within the UA Vs.
2) We formulate our UA Vs’ collaborative inference and
path planning as a nonlinear optimization problem that
seeks to minimize the latency of making the ﬁnalclassiﬁcation decision while planning the UA Vs paths
to cover the whole area by visiting different loca-
tions and controlling critical spots. This optimizationrespects the UA Vs constraints, such as memory usage
and computational complexity.
3) We relax the optimization problem by ﬁxing one variable
and running the optimization for the other one for the
maximum of possible values and choosing the value that
gives the minimum latency.
4) The formulated optimization problem is NP-hard, and
it is not adequate for online resource allocation; hence,
we introduce a reinforcement learning (RL) algorithmthat seeks to ﬁnd the trajectory path of UA Vs while
distributing CNN tasks. The RL approach is solved
using an efﬁcient algorithm, namely, proximal policy
optimization (PPO).
5) We evaluate our system model through extensive simu-
lations to prove its performance by considering different
CNN networks, different device conﬁgurations, and dif-
ferent numbers of participants. Additionally, we compareour model with two benchmark system models that use
different algorithms.
6) To the best of our knowledge, our work is the ﬁrst to plan
the UA Vs’ trajectories while considering the latency of
executing the distributed CNN tasks by considering the
distances between cooperating devices and their effecton the interference.
This article is organized as follows. Section IIpresents
the related works, and Section IIIshows the system model,
the problem formulation, and the RL model. Section IV
presents the performance evaluation and simulation results of
our approach. Finally, Section Vpresents the conclusions.
II. R
ELATED WORKS
In this section, we present a literature review of distributed
inference and path planning of multi-UA Vs while being on a
mission.
A. Distributed Inferences Systems
The distributed CNN networks have become widely known
because they assist resource-constrained machines and reduce
Authorized licensed use limited to: Hanoi University of Science & Technology. Downloaded on March 12,2026 at 08:24:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- PAGE 3 ---

DHUHEIR et al.: DEEP REINFORCEMENT LEARNING 8187
the time execution of classifying input data. Due to the
exceptional performance of the distributed systems, theyhave been integrated into many applications, including
image recognition and image classiﬁcation. The work by
Teerapittayanon et al. [ 16] suggests that UA Vs work as a
relaying device that captures images and frames from the
ground. Then, the data is sent to MEC servers to process
them and send the ﬁnal classiﬁcation decision back to theconnected UA Vs. This scenario depends on high-performance
machines to process the data. Another technique was presented
by Yang et al. [ 9], [17] in which the distribution of the model is
based on the network quality, quality of the captured images,
and layers. More speciﬁcally, the ﬁrst segment is executed
in the data-generating UA V , while the rest is ofﬂoaded to the
MEC server. The partition point depends on the network qual-
ity and the quality of the images that determine the size of theDNN network. However, this approach does not consider the
latency of the transmitted data, which affects the efﬁciency of
ﬁnding the ﬁnal classiﬁcation decision.
Another mainstream direction is to distribute the DNN
model within the available resource-constrained devices (e.g.,
UA Vs) in a way to accomplish the whole inference andmake the ﬁnal classiﬁcation decision within the UA Vs, with-
out resorting to remote servers. Disabato et al. [ 18] proposed
to distribute the CNN layers to the connected IoT devices.The classiﬁcation decision was made locally while considering
the connected IoT devices’ memory usage and computational
complexity. However, this work has not investigated the dis-tribution of incoming online requests, which is a challenging
scenario in surveillance systems. Jouhari et al. [ 19]h a v ei n v e s -
tigated using multi-UA Vs for surveillance and monitoring tasks
in online scenarios. They focused on minimizing the latency of
making the ﬁnal classiﬁcation decision by ﬁnding the optimallayer placement within UA V participants. However, the author
considered a static path planning that does not take into
account the allocation strategy and the latency of inferencecooperative computation. In this article, we propose a joint
allocation and trajectory strategy that synchronizes the path
of UA Vs with the required data sharing in order to minimizethe latency of distributed tasks. In our previous work [ 20], we
studied an online scenario of distributing the CNN layers into
a swarm of UA Vs, i.e., each UA V is dedicated to executing apart of the request. We also assumed in our previous work a
constant data rate, i.e., the mobility of UA Vs was assumed to
be homogeneous, and the UA Vs move while maintaining thesame distance between them. Nevertheless, UA Vs’ heteroge-
neous mobility is a more realistic scenario where the distances
between devices change, which affects the latency of collab-orative services presented by UA Vs. Therefore, in this article,
we consider a heterogeneous scenario of moving UA Vs where
the data rates change based on UA V distances, and the allo-
cation of different CNN layers and path planning are chosen
while mitigating the interference and minimizing the latency.
B. UAVs Path Planning
Planning the path of UA Vs has been investigated by many
researchers. Demiane et al. [ 21] have proposed an approachwhere the monitored area is divided into equal cell sizes. The
covered area is classiﬁed based on the necessity of UA Vs topass through these cells, i.e., some cells do not witness many
incidents, and others are critical; hence, the UA Vs need to
traverse regularly. In this work, the system model deals withone UA V to cover the whole area, which is not sufﬁcient to
monitor a big area and provide services. Another approach is
proposed by Samir et al. [ 22], where the UA Vs collect data
from resource-constrained IoT devices on the ground and send
them to a remote server to process them while optimizing
the paths to cover the whole area. This model depends onthe environment and quality of the links between the UA Vs
and the ground station. Gedawy et al. [ 23] introduced another
scenario of trajectory path planning. In this approach, strate-
gic locations are deﬁned, and the UA Vs plan their trajectories
based on these strategic locations while consuming less energy.However, this study considers independent devices, and they
do not present any service that requires the collaboration of
UA Vs in which the main goal is to plan the UA Vs’ path with-out involving any computational task. In our scenario, each
UA V is supposed to capture images/collect data from the cov-
ered area, set up a CNN inference, and distribute it to theconnected UA Vs depending on their available resources while
minimizing the classiﬁcation latency and planning their trajec-
tory paths. The UA Vs are supposed to visit the crucial cellsmore often than other cells, which we call hot cells. The main
goal of this surveillance system is to monitor the hot cells in
the environment; therefore, we ensure that the hot cells are vis-ited at each time step. Our system model obligates the UA Vs
to visit the hot cells each time step tand satisfy part of the
service demand because these hot cells are more susceptible
to accidents on the spot. We highlight here that the number of
UA Vs should be at least equal to or greater than the numberof hot cells; hence, each hot cell should be monitored at each
time step t. However, due to the different resource requests
and limited resource capacities, the UA Vs move to delegatethe subsequent tasks to devices with available resources and
minimize the delay of the distributed inferences.
The existing literature on adopting UA Vs for different mis-
sions while planning the UA Vs paths is investigated in many
studies, such as those in [ 14] and [ 15], which use UA Vs as base
stations to provide services to the ground users while planning
the UA Vs’ trajectory paths. Another approach found in [ 24]
uses multi-UA Vs as base stations to provide services to clusters
containing ground users while they navigate to maximize thecoverage of the served users. Other kinds of literature plan the
UA Vs’ trajectories in order to achieve monitoring and surveil-
lance missions in order to make the UA Vs cover the wholearea [ 9]. Jouhari et al. [ 19] investigated the distribution of
CNN layers into multiple UA Vs while considering already
planned paths of UA Vs to allocate the layers and minimize
the latency of CNN execution. In our study, we are dealing
with a different context compared to [ 9], [14], and [ 15], which
is CNN distribution for monitoring mission, and we optimize
the UA Vs paths to assist the resource allocation and minimize
the latency of the inference, which is not the case of [ 19].
Multi-UA Vs with edge computing and path planning have been
investigated in many research studies. Almost all the studies
Authorized licensed use limited to: Hanoi University of Science & Technology. Downloaded on March 12,2026 at 08:24:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- PAGE 4 ---

8188 IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 10, NO. 9, 1 MAY 2023
consider UA Vs as an edge computing device while planning
their trajectory. Chang et al. [ 14] used an RL-based model
to plan the paths of UA Vs until reaching their destination.
Meanwhile, these UA Vs provide services to terminal users on
the ground, playing the role of edge devices. Another approachwas introduced by Liu et al. [ 25]. This approach also used RL
to draw UA Vs’ paths and provide edge computing services to
ground users. The authors adopted the linear-based algorithmto conduct this process and evaluate the Quality of Service
(QoS) for the terminal users who received UA Vs’ services.
Different RL algorithms are used to plan the trajectory of
the UA V swarm. The agents generally learn the optimal policy
based on the reward and penalties they receive after selecting
the path planning actions. Another technique presented in [ 26]
and [ 27] used deep RL (DRL) to plan the trajectory paths for
tracking an object in the ground in the presence of obstacles.Moon et al. [ 26] focused on tracking the object in the pres-
ence of interference that comes from Line of Sight (LoS) and
Non-LoS (NLoS); while Li and Wu [ 27] studied the usage of
long short-term memory networks to approximate the states
in the environments. All the presented studies in [ 26], [27],
and [ 28] use multi UA Vs to accomplish a mission while plan-
ning the trajectory of UA Vs in the presence of interference.
However, they do not study the effect of the distance between
the connected UA Vs on trajectory planning which affects theinterference and the execution time of predicting the targets.
Some studies focused on studying the trajectory of UA Vs while
collecting data from ground users, and they used differentDRL algorithms. The work in these studies evaluates the mini-
mum completion time of collecting data [ 29], [30], [31]. Other
works studied the trajectory planning of UA Vs while on a mis-
sion by using machine-learning-based algorithms [ 32], [33],
[34], [35], [36]. Although the previous works [ 29], [30], [31],
[32], [33], [34], [35], [36] studied the trajectory of UA Vs while
being involved on a mission, they did not consider studying
the effect of trajectory on latency and interference, the effectof distances between UA Vs on the interference while UA Vs
are moving, and the effect of UA Vs’ capacities on the latency
calculations, which are the aim factors addressed in this article.
III. D
ISTRIBUTED CNN AND PATH PLANNING ON
RESOURCE -CONSTRAINED UAV S
This section introduces our system model for incorporating
distributed CNN networks and planning the path of UA Vs. We
formulate our system model as an optimization problem that
seeks to ﬁnd the minimum latency between capturing an image
from the ground and providing the ﬁnal classiﬁcation decision.The UA Vs are moving to monitor a speciﬁc area while a CNN
network processes the incoming requests. Because the formu-
lated problem is NP-hard, we introduce an RL system modelintended to plan the UA Vs’ trajectory path while capturing
images from the ground to be classiﬁed.
A. System Model
Our system model is shown in Fig. 1. In this system, we
divide the covered area into equal cell sizes, and the number of
cells in the grid is denoted as C. Each UA V captures multiple
Fig. 1. System model.
images in real time and collaborates with other UA Vs to com-
pute the classiﬁcation prediction of the captured images. In
this scenario, the UA Vs pass through the whole area; how-ever, not all the cells have the same importance to visit, as
shown in Fig. 1. Some areas are important and require UA Vs
to visit more than others (e.g., expected ﬁre areas). Therefore,our system model is designed to surveil the area while focus-
ing on the hot cell locations. We assume that the number of
UA Vs needs to be greater than or equal to the number of hotcells to guarantee that at least one hot cell area is visited at
each time step. For nonhot cell areas, the UA Vs can visit and
capture requests from the visited areas. While the UA Vs movein the area, they need to satisfy two essential tasks, one is exe-
cuting part of the requests based on their capabilities, and the
other task is to plan their path in a way that minimizes the
latency of calculating the ﬁnal classiﬁcation prediction. At the
same time, the UA V needs to mitigate interference by locatingitself in a suitable position based on its distance from the rest
of the UA Vs in the swarm. As the energy and capacities of
UA Vs are limited, planning their paths is important to exploittheir resources more efﬁciently.
If resources are not sufﬁcient to process the entire CNN
inference, the UA V sends the output of the intermediate layerto other UA Vs to process the rest of the tasks. The monitored
area might include different surveillance systems such as for-
est ﬁre detection, tracking an object on the ground, bordersmonitoring, etc., which means multiple CNN models can be
used according to the surveillance objectives.
The size of images captured by different UA Vs is the
same; however, the model can handle images of different sizes
(e.g., based on the capturing camera). The processing time of
the CNN depends on the type and architecture of the CNNnetwork being used to process the data. Moreover, the distri-
bution system in our approach is per layer. Each layer will
be assigned to one UA V , and based on the UA V capabilities,
part of the inference is processed. If one UA V does not have
enough resources to accomplish its task of the CNN layer,this part will be delegated to another UA V to process it until
the whole classiﬁcation task is completed within the swarm.
We highlight that for each request, all layers are computedfollowing the trained CNN model without applying any early
exit strategy.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Hanoi University of Science & Technology. Downloaded on March 12,2026 at 08:24:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- PAGE 5 ---

DHUHEIR et al.: DEEP REINFORCEMENT LEARNING 8189
Furthermore, the latency is deﬁned as the delay from cap-
turing an image from the ground until making the ﬁnalclassiﬁcation decision, and it is composed of two delays, com-
putational and communication delays. The latency depends on
the distribution of layers and the distances between UA Vs.We notify that the latency is impacted by the capacity of
devices assigned to different layers and the distances/data rates
between the communicating devices, which depend on the pathplanning. The communication latency is impacted by the num-
ber of subsequent layers assigned to each UA V device. The
computation latency of the same type of CNN is not the samefor all requests, which depends on the number of subsequent
layers and the available capacities of the devices.
The model consists of Nconnected UA Vs capturing images
and feeding them to the CNN network. These UA Vs col-
laborate to classify the input images onboard based on theircapacities. The system seeks to ﬁnd the suitable set of UA Vs
that can achieve the best latency, i.e., minimizing the time
of making the ﬁnal classiﬁcation decision. We consider sev-eral time frames in which each frame (e.g., a few minutes) is
divided into Tequal time slots with a ﬁxed length (e.g., a few
seconds). Let us assume that the ith UA V unit i∈Nis char-
acterized by two important constraints: 1) maximum memory
usage ¯m
iand 2) maximum computational capacity ¯ci.I nt h i s
model, each UA V i∈{1,..., N}is assumed to generate RQt
i
requests per time step tsuch that/summationtext
iRQt
i=RQt, where RQt
denotes the total number of requests at t.
In this work, the UA Vs are assumed to capture images from
the ground, and the trained CNN model is used to classify the
input references. Each UA V in the swarm has a copy of the
trained model and accepts part of the tasks to execute it. The
proposed distribution system is compatible with the typical
CNN network that is designed into a pipeline of successivelayers, i.e., convolutional and ReLU, and without incorporat-
ing residual blocks [ 37]. In this context, we assume Lto be
the number of layers of the CNN model, which represents thenumber of subtasks that are distributed to the connected UA Vs
to classify the input image. jrepresents the index of the layer
where j∈{1,..., L}. Each layer has a memory requirement
m
jand a computation demand cj. The memory usage mj(in
bytes) represents the number of weights that the layer jstores
multiplied by the size of the data type intended to characterizethe parameters. The second requirement is the computational
load c
j, which is the number of multiplications that are pro-
cessed to execute the layer j[38]. Therefore, the computational
load requirement for the layer jis calculated as follows:
cj=nj−1.s2
j.nj.z2
j (1)
where nj−1is the number of input channels at layer j, which
represents the total feature maps that come from the layer j−1,
ands2
jandz2
jare the spatial ﬁlter size of the jth layer and the
spatial size of the output map, respectively. The computationalload calculations of the fully connected layer jare the number
of neurons n
jof layer jmultiplied by the number of neurons
nj−1of the layer j−1, and it is represented as follows:
cj=nj−1.nj. (2)The memory requirements of layers are calculated as the num-
ber of weights Wjof the current layer jby the number of bits
bdedicated to storing the weight, and it is represented as
mNc
j=Wj.b. (3)
All UA Vs are assumed to transmit a ﬁxed power Pto each
other in which the received power at one UA V is Pt
i,k=ht
i,k.P,
where ht
i,kis deﬁned as the channel gain from UA V ito UA V
kin the same time slot t. The channel gain is calculated as
follows:
ht
i,k=C/summationdisplay
v=1C/summationdisplay
q=1h0
d(v,q)2./Psi1t,i,q./Psi1t,k,v∀i∈N∀t∈T(4)
where h0is deﬁned as the median of the mean path gain at
reference distance d0=1m , d(q,v)represents the distance
between the cell qthat contains UA V iand cell vthat contains
UAV k, and/Psi1t,i,qrepresents a binary variable that takes 1 if
the UA V iexists in cell qat time frame tand 0 otherwise.
When UA V isends intermediate data to UA V kin time slot t,
the achievable data rate can be calculated as follows:
ρi,k(t)=Bt
i,klog2/parenleftBigg
1+Pt
i,k
σ2/parenrightBigg
(5)
where σ2is the thermal noise power, and Bt
i,kis the transmis-
sion bandwidth between UA V ito UA V kat time slot t.W e
note that the Doppler effect is out of the scope of this article,
and it will be considered in future work.
B. Problem Formulation
Our system model is designed to deal with real-time
requests, ﬁnd the optimal placement of the layers in the
available UA Vs, ﬁnd the optimal position of the connectedUA Vs, and plan the path they can follow. The UA Vs should
avoid colliding with others and provide monitoring services
to the covered area. We formulate this methodology as an
optimization problem that seeks to ﬁnd the minimum latency
of calculating the classiﬁcation prediction and plan the UA Vs’trajectory to accomplish their mission of monitoring a region.
The proposed optimization problem depends on two deci-
sion variables /Psi1
t,i,qandδt,r,i,j, and they are deﬁned as
follows:
∀r∈RQt∀i,k∈N∀j∈L
δt,r,i,j=⎧
⎨
⎩1,if UA V iexecutes the layer jof request r
at time frame t
0,otherwise(6)
/Psi1t,i,q=/braceleftbigg1,if the UA V iexists at cell qat time instance t
0,otherwise .
(7)
The objective function minimizes the latency of executing all
decision variables at time frame T, which is shown in ( 8). We
emphasize that we adopted the method of per-layer distribution
as it is suitable for systems with a limited number of UA Vs
and compatible with the UA V environment that we describedin the system model. In addition, the per-layer distribution
leads to less data transmission, hence decreasing the energy
Authorized licensed use limited to: Hanoi University of Science & Technology. Downloaded on March 12,2026 at 08:24:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- PAGE 6 ---

8190 IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 10, NO. 9, 1 MAY 2023
consumption as same as reducing the dependency between
UA V devices. Finally, to support the dynamic of the model(e.g., the change of requests rate and the change of the number
of UA Vs joining or quitting for charging), the optimization
process is executed periodically.
Our problem is an integer linear programming (ILP)
optimization and it is formulated as follows:
min
/Psi1t,i,q,δt,r,i,jT/summationdisplay
t=1RQt/summationdisplay
r=1N/summationdisplay
i=1N/summationdisplay
k=1,k/negationslash=iL−1/summationdisplay
j=1δt,r,i,j.δt,r,k,j+1
.Kr,j
ρi,k(t)+N/summationdisplay
i=1t(p)
i+ts (8)
s.t.
RQt/summationdisplay
r=1L/summationdisplay
j=1δt,r,i,j.mj≤¯mi∀i∈N (8a)
RQt/summationdisplay
r=1L/summationdisplay
j=1δt,r,i,j.cj≤¯ci∀i∈N (8b)
∀r∈RQt∀j∈L∀t∈T
N/summationdisplay
i=1δt,r,i,j=/braceleftbigg1, ifj≤L
0, otherwise(8c)
∀t∈T∀j∈L∀i∈N∀r∈RQt,δt,r,i,j∈{0,1}
(8d)
∀t∈T∀i∈N∀v∈C,/Psi1 t,i,q∈{0,1} (8e)
C/summationdisplay
v=1/Psi1t,i,v=1∀i∈N∀t∈T (8f)
N/summationdisplay
i=1/Psi1t,i,v≤1∀v∈C∀t∈T (8g)
N/summationdisplay
i=1/Psi1t,i,q==1∀q∈/Omega1∀t∈T (8h)
and where
ts=T/summationdisplay
t=1RQt/summationdisplay
r=1N/summationdisplay
k=1,k/negationslash=s¯δt,r,s,1.δt,r,k,1.Ks
ρi,k(t)(9)
t(p)
i=T/summationdisplay
t=1RQt/summationdisplay
r=1L/summationdisplay
j=1δt,r,i,j.cj
ei. (10)
Equation ( 8) calculates the total latency of making the ﬁnal
classiﬁcation of the captured images, which consists of threemain parts.
1) The latency t
sin (9) is the time required by the UA V
that captures the request from the ground to transmit itscollected data to the UA V computing the ﬁrst layer of
this request. K
sis the size of the data collected by the
source UA V sfrom the ground. In ( 9),¯δt,r,i,1represents
the complement of the decision variable δt,r,i,1.
2)t(p)
iis the total time required to compute all tasks
assigned to device i, which is presented in ( 10). Thistime is deﬁned as the ratio between the computa-
tional requirement cjof the layer to the number of
multiplications eithat UA V ican process in a second.
3) The time required to transmit the intermediate represen-
tation of the input image from the UA V device ito the
UAV device kthat is assumed to be connected in the
swarm and can be represented in
Kr,j
ρi,k(t)(11)
where Kr,jis the intermediate data generated from layer
jof request r, andρi,krepresents the transmission data
rate between the UA V device iand the UA V device k.
It represents the distance and the quality of the trans-
mission connection between UA Vs. Since UA Vs are
moving, the value of ρi,kis changing according to the
distance between the UA Vs over the time interval in the
optimization. The data rate is calculated according to ( 5)
as introduced in [ 39].
The constraints in ( 8a) and ( 8b) are added to set a threshold
for the maximum memory usage and the maximum computa-
tional capacity of the UA Vs in the swarm, respectively. Thesethresholds are set to make the UA Vs work within the allow-
able limit that respects their resources and to make the latency
calculation compatible with the real models. Moreover, theconstraint in ( 8c) is added to ensure that each layer is com-
puted by one UA V , and the constraints in ( 8d) and ( 8e) refer to
the binary indication of the decision variables and they acceptonly the value of 0 or 1. The constraint in ( 8f) is set to ensure
that each cell is visited only by one UA V at each time step.
This condition is added to avoid collision between different
UA Vs that cannot co-exist in the same area at the same time.
Meanwhile, the constraint in ( 8g) is set to guarantee that each
UA V visits only one cell at each time instance t. The constraint
in (8h) refers to the hot cells that UA Vs need to traverse and
capture images from them. We highlight that /Omega1denotes the set
of hot cells in the grid. If the whole area should be monitored
during the period T, the hot cells should include the indexes
of all cells over time. Moreover, the size of hot cells must beequal to or less than the number of UA Vs.
The optimization problem in ( 8) is NP-hard, and ﬁnding
the optimal solution is quite difﬁcult because it is time con-suming and cannot be used to receive online requests and
execute real-time classiﬁcations. In addition, our optimization
problem changes periodically, and it assumes full knowl-edge of the set of incoming inferences. The UA Vs’ resources
should also be reinitialized after computing the classiﬁca-
tions. Hence, using the optimization ( 9) is not practical in
the case of dynamic environments. Recently, RL has shown
exemplary performance in dealing with dynamic and realistic
models [ 40]. The RL systems can learn the optimal solu-
tion from the knowledge of the environment states and make
the best prediction from the available choices based on theprevious rewards. Moreover, RL systems have the advantage of
continuous learning to adapt to any ﬂuctuations in the dynamic
system models. In summary, to distribute the online classiﬁca-tions among UA Vs and ﬁnd their optimal path, we introduce
an RL-based model that can approximate the optimal solution.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Hanoi University of Science & Technology. Downloaded on March 12,2026 at 08:24:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- PAGE 7 ---

DHUHEIR et al.: DEEP REINFORCEMENT LEARNING 8191
TABLE I
LIST OF IMPORTANT KEYNOTATIONS
Table Ipresents a summary of symbols presented in our work
for ease of reference.
C. Reinforcement Learning for Trajectory Path Planning and
Inferences Distribution on Resource-Constrained
Swarm of UAVs
Finding the optimal solution to ( 8) is complex and time
consuming due to the nonlinearity in ( 4) and the objective
function; hence, it cannot be applied in real-time scenarios.
To solve the problem, we adopted a real-time and dynamic
solution, which is DRL. The learning process of RL modelsis done ofﬂine, and after the convergence of the algorithm and
the allocation policy is learned, the actions will be taken in
real time. Speciﬁcally, the deep DNN model that we adoptfor RL has two layers and 64 neurons for each layer, which is
very light, and the system’s complexity is negligible; therefore,
the RL solution can take on-the-ﬂy actions, and our algorithmcan handle the layers’ allocations and plan the UA Vs trajec-
tory paths online. Our RL system model seeks to ﬁnd the
set of UA V devices that collaborate to achieve the minimum
classiﬁcation latency and plan their paths that further con-
tribute to minimizing this latency. This section presents ourmethod of designing the system environment, sets of states and
actions, developing a practical reward function, presenting the
RL agent, and selecting the most appropriate RL technique.
The RL agent chooses the actions based on the environ-
ment states to maximize the long-term reward. Accordingly,the primary objective is to ﬁnd the optimal policy that accom-
plishes the maximum reward. In the exploration phase, the
agent learns by trying different action choices and receivingpositive or negative feedback in terms of reward. The agent
learns from trial and error by interacting with the changes in
the environment and accordingly adapting to it. During this
phase, the RL agent gains experience from the rewards and
penalties of each action, and after the process of exploration,it becomes ready to converge to the maximum reward policy.
In our platform, the RL agent is doing two tasks (allocation
and path planning decisions).
At each time step, the RL agent chooses the location of each
UA V and decides if this UA V can handle the current layer of
the CNN. The decision taken depends on many factors thathave an impact on the distribution process, such as the trained
CNN network, the remaining resources of the UA Vs, the loca-
tion of the other UA Vs in the grid, the current layer, and thepositions of hot cells in the grid. Our RL-system model is rep-
resented by a framework of Markov decision process (MDP)
depicted by (S,A,P,R,γ).Srepresents the set of states, A
is the set of actions, Pis the possible transition probabilities
of the states, Ris the immediate rewards received for each
action, and γrepresents the discount learning factor. The MDP
elements are explained in detail in the following sections.
1) Environment Modeling: The environment model of this
system includes a set of UA Vs collaborating to accomplishonline inference requests. Let πdenote the stochastic policy
in which π:S×A→[0,1]. The MDP environment model
Authorized licensed use limited to: Hanoi University of Science & Technology. Downloaded on March 12,2026 at 08:24:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- PAGE 8 ---

8192 IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 10, NO. 9, 1 MAY 2023
is set to receive the instructions from a centralized agent that
takes actions At, receives rewards/penalties Rt, and learns the
optimal policy π∗from the feedback it receives at each time
step t. The agent seeks to ﬁnd the optimal policy π∗, which
has the maximum value vπ∗(s)for all elements s∈S.T h e
value set of vπ(s)represents the expected return of the reward
function after applying action aon state swhile trying to reach
the optimal policy, and it is expressed as follows:
vπ(s)=Eat,st+1/parenleftbigg∞/summationdisplay
k=1γk−tRk|St=s/parenrightbigg
. (12)
By receiving rewards and penalties, the agent can learn from
the past experiences of the multidecisions, i.e., layers alloca-tion and the trajectory path, in order to increase the rewards
R
t. In our system model, one episode consists of multiple time
steps. It represents a distribution of one request to the avail-able UA Vs while moving in the grid and avoiding colliding
with each other. One time step trepresents the allocation of
one layer of the CNN request in one of the UA Vs and thelocation of this UA V . In addition, each episode is independent
of other episodes, and the reward is set to 0 at the beginning
of each one. We note that our agent does not have visibility ofthe environment design nor information about the next state.
Alternately, the agent learns the optimal policy π
∗from the
interaction with the environment, receiving rewards/penalties,
i.e., the optimal policy π∗is a function to be learned by tak-
ing action Atto the current state Stin order to move the agent
to the next state St+1, i.e., π∗:S→A.F i g . 2depicts the
representations of the states and actions of one episode. The
episode length depends on the size of the CNN and the num-ber of UA Vs, in which the length of one episode is L×N,
where Lis the number of layers and Nis the number of UA Vs.
Hence, the episode length in each CNN network is different.
2) States and Actions: In order to achieve high system
performance, the states should include helpful information thatdescribes the environment sufﬁciently to the agent. Our system
model is depicted in Fig. 3. The action vector is composed of
two parts, allocation and trajectory planning, i.e., A=[a
1,a2].
The set of states Sincludes all the conﬁgurations that impact
the transitions of UA Vs in the grid and the computations of dif-
ferent CNN layers. Hence, at each time step, the informationreceived by the agent includes the following observations.
1)l
j:The current layer to be allocated.
2)Ni:The current UA V .
3)¯mi:The memory capacity of the UA V device i.
4)¯ci:The computational load of the UA V device i.
5){P∗
s1,...,P∗
sN}:The position of UA Vs in the grid.
6){/Omega11,...,/Omega1N}:The position of hot cells in the grid.
The model state is hence a vector that contains the follow-
ing:{lj,Ni,mi,ci,{P∗
s1,..., P∗
sN},{/Omega11,...,/Omega1 N}}. We empha-
size that iis the index of UA V devices, and /Omega1Nis the index
of hot cells in the grid where the indices of UA Vs positionsand hot cells are known to the model, i.e., the length of the
UA Vs position vector is the length of the grid containing the
positions of the UA Vs in the grid. The vector is composed ofbinaries where 1 means that it is an index of UA V or hot cell.
According to the described system design, the states set length
Fig. 2. Episode representation of the RL model.
is(2∗size(grid)+D).Drepresents the number of parame-
ters (e.g., memory, computational load, current layer, etc.) that
will be included in the states, which is equal to 4. In addi-
tion, at the end of each time step, the memory, computationalcapacity, and the UA Vs’ positions are updated according to
the taken action. Moreover, the current layer and current UA V
device are also updated according to the number of runningtime steps. The updated data will be the input to the next time
step. In addition, the shape of the action vector consists of
two parts, one is the allocation part, which is a binary indexthat indicates whether to allocate or not. The other part is the
index of the cell where the UA V should move.
3) Reward Function: The reward function is an important
parameter that needs to be well designed in order to get highsystem performance and lead to minimum latency in comput-
ing the ﬁnal prediction. In RL systems, when the agent takes
action A
tfor the current state St, it gets feedback about the
result which is represented as a reward. Our reward function is
based on the ability of the RL agent to respect the constraints
formulated in the problem ( 8)
⎧
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎩Cons1: if/summationtext
t
j=N×⌊(t−1)/N⌋+1aj
1=1 constraint ( 8c)
Cons2: if j∈{N×⌊(t−1)/N⌋+1,..., t}→
aj
2/∈UA VsVisitedList constraints ( 8f)a n d( 8g)
Cons3: if at
1=1→mj≤¯miandcj≤¯ci
constraints ( 8a)a n d( 8b).
(13)
Cons1 is added to make the sum of actions equal to 1,
and it is equivalent to the constraint in ( 8c). This constraint
ensures that the layer related to the steps in {N×⌊(t−1)/N⌋+
Authorized licensed use limited to: Hanoi University of Science & Technology. Downloaded on March 12,2026 at 08:24:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- PAGE 9 ---

DHUHEIR et al.: DEEP REINFORCEMENT LEARNING 8193
Fig. 3. RL system model.
1,..., t}is assigned to only one UA V . Cons2 indicates that
each UA V can visit one cell and can exist in one cell at each
time step, and UA VsVisitedList is an empty list deﬁned at thebeginning of each layer that stores the cells UA Vs visit. Cons3,
on the other hand, refers to the maximum threshold of the
UA V resources to make sure that the chosen UA V has enoughresources to execute the speciﬁed layer of the request. Then,
we deﬁne the instant reward, which refers to the total reward
of respecting the constraints of the multitask altogether, i.e.,
R
t=Cons1 ∗Cons2 ∗Cons3 . (14)
According to ( 14), if Cons1 is not respected, i.e., (Cons1 =0),
this means that the related task is rejected and cannot be han-
dled by any of the connected UA Vs due to the nonavailability
of the UA Vs or this layer is assigned to multi-UA Vs at the sametime. Therefore, the reward is set to 0 as a penalty to encour-
age the RL system to avoid these invalid cases. Moreover, if
more than one UA V exists in the same cell in the grid, i.e.,(Cons2 =0), the step reward will be 0, and the system rec-
ognizes this as a penalty. Finally, if Cons3 is not respected,
i.e.,(Cons3 =0), this indicates that the chosen UA V does
not have enough resources to handle the request. In this case,
the immediate reward is equal to 0. The step reward will be
equal to 1, if all the constraints are respected. In addition, theﬁrst time step, i.e., t=1, is dedicated to calculating the time
delay of the transmission of the image to the UA V that will
compute the ﬁrst layer, hence, the delay time (K
s/ρs,i(t))of
calculating the ﬁrst layer is added as a penalty to the total
reward as indicated in ( 9). Then, in the remaining time steps,
the time delay of calculating the computation and communi-cation latency equal to ((K
j/ρi,k(t))+(cj/ei))as indicated in
(9) is added as a penalty to the instant reward.
In (15),Sfis denoted to the QoS factor. Particularly, this
factor refers to the encouragement level of the agent to tra-
verse through hot cells and accept requests. According to ( 15),
when Sfbecomes higher, the reward R/Omega1becomes high, and
it encourages the RL system to visit hot cells and provide
services. In other words, the UA Vs should traverse throughthese cells and capture requests. According to this scenario, at
each time step, the UA V traverses through hot cells, and eachhot cell has a demand service to be fulﬁlled. The demand
vector of all hot cells is denoted by φ
/Omega1.
Hence, we deﬁne the reward related to the services that are
offered to the hot cells as the same work that has been done
in [25]
R/Omega1=Sf
1+/summationtext/Omega1
i=1φ/Omega1(t). (15)
4) RL Agent Design: The primary goal of the RL agent is
to maximize rewards by experimenting with various environ-
ment states and select actions. In this way, the agent learnsthe model’s optimal policy π
∗from its surroundings. Finding
the optimal policy starts by creating a strategy of the optimal
set of action-values Q(St,At), which gives the agent a hint
about the expected future reward of taking a speciﬁc action
At. The function of action-value Q(St,At)of the RL agent,
which represents the future expected reward and can depictthe performance/goodness of the selected action and is shown
as follows:
Q(s
t,at)=Eat,st+1/parenleftbiggN/summationdisplay
k=1γkRt+k|St=s,At=a/parenrightbigg
(16)
where γis the discount factor in which γ∈[0,1] and it
represents the average of immediate reward to the long-term
rewards. The differentiated equation of transitions in states and
actions can be expressed as [ 26]
Q(s,r)←Q(s,r)+α/parenleftBig
Rt+γmax
aˆQ(s,a)−Q(s,a)/parenrightBig
(17)
where αrepresents the learning factor.
5) PPO Algorithm: PPO was introduced in [ 41], which
belongs to the family of policy gradient methods. In order
to improve the RL system performance and handle multitask
operations, we chose the PPO as it can relax the complexconstraints and replace them with ﬂexible ones [ 42]. The PPO
algorithm’s main goal can be summarized as follows:
J
PPO=Es,a/bracketleftbig
min/parenleftbig
η∗Aπold,clip(η,1−ε,1+ε)Aπold/parenrightbig/bracketrightbig
(18)
where ηrepresents the policy probability ratio and is calcu-
lated as follows:
η=π(a,s)
πold(a,s). (19)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Hanoi University of Science & Technology. Downloaded on March 12,2026 at 08:24:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- PAGE 10 ---

8194 IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 10, NO. 9, 1 MAY 2023
Aπ=Q(st,at)−vπ(s), which refers to the advantage function
that measures the quality of action compared to the actionsavailable in the state vector and can be calculated by using
different methods [ 43]. The value function v
π(s)measures the
long-term reward of being in the state sfollowing the policy
π, while Q(st,at)measures the long-term reward of taking
speciﬁc action in the state vector sfollowing the policy π.ε
is denoted to the PPO clip range [ 44]. In the case of Aπold>1,
the output of the function ηbecomes very large, i.e., (larger
than 1) in order to make the system performance higher; how-
ever, this leads to unsuitability in the learning steps. PPOsolves this problem in ( 18) by restricting the value of ηto
be in the range of [1 −ε,1+ε].
In our system model, the distribution of participants varies
and depends on the available capacities. Moreover, the system
is dynamic due to the number of UA Vs joining or leaving theswarm, and the action space vector is related to the active
UA V devices. Therefore, it is difﬁcult to apply traditional RL
techniques to solve the layers allocation and planning of thetrajectory path of UA Vs, where Q-tables are adopted to keep
the historical Q-values. We adopt DRL to solve the aforemen-
tioned challenges and learn the parametric representation ofthe action-value function Q(s,a). The goal of the DRL is to
minimize the loss function obtained as follows:
L(θ)=E/bracketleftBigg/parenleftbigg
R
t+γmax
¯aQ/parenleftbig
¯s,¯a,¯θ/parenrightbig
−Q(s,a,θ)/parenrightbigg2/bracketrightBigg
(20)
where Q(s,r)is approximated to Q(s,r,θ)andθrepresents
the weights of deep learning networks.
To stabilize our model’s training using the PPO algorithm
and ensure the convergence of the system model, we used a
variety of methods and techniques summarized in Algorithm 1.
In this algorithm, we initialize the CNN network parametersthat will be used in the training process, where two copies of
theQ-network with the same neural network conﬁguration and
weights (lines 2 and 3). Then, we prepare the swarm of UA Vsfor random distribution in the grid after ensuring that these
UA Vs respect our two main path planning constraints, which
are described in Cons2 in ( 13) (lines 4–7). The training process
generates a series of episodes that repeatedly occur (lines 9–
41). The training process executes several sequential episodes
(lines 10–29), then the buffer stores the experience tuples of thetrained episodes (lines 29–41). The agent generates a different
set of discrete actions. The actions vector has two parts: the
ﬁrst is the allocation distribution of inferences, and the secondis related to UA V path planning (line 14). Furthermore, if the
constraints of 13are valid (line 15), the agent checks the type
of layers it is processing and calculates penalties related tolatency (lines 16–36). Besides, if the chosen participant respects
the constraints in ( 13), a step reward is added to the agent’s
rewards (lines 19–22). Following the selection of a valid UA V ,
a penalty is added to the total reward to represent the latency
of processing that layer. The agent then examines the pathplanning constraints. If a UA V in the swarm does not coexist
with another UA V , a reward is given to the agent (lines 23–25).
A reward is also given to each UA V that passes through hotcells at each time step in order to encourage the swarm of
UA Vs to traverse these hot cells (lines 26–28). Following that,Algorithm 1 RL Algorithm
1:Initialization
2:Randomly initialize the parameters θof the Q-network.
3:Randomly initialize the parameters θold of the Q-network:
θold←θ.
4:Randomly distribute UA Vs in the grid:
5:foreach UAV in C do
6: distribute all UA Vs in the grid
7:end for
8:PPO2 training:
9:foreach episode r∈Rdo
10: foreach t∈Tdo
11: foreach j∈{1,2,3,..., L}do
12: foreach i∈{1,2,3,..., N}do
13: S(i)={j,i,mj,cj,{/Omega11,/Omega12,...,/Omega1 N},
{P∗s1,Ps2∗,..., P∗sN}}
14: choose action Aibased on /epsilon1
15: ifCons 1then equation ( 13)
16: ifj=1then
17: Rt=Rt−K1
ρi,k(t)−cr,1
ei
18: else if j/negationslash=1then
19: ifCons 3then equation ( 13)
20: Ri=Ri−(Kr,s
ρi,k(t)+cr,j
ei)
21: a2=i
22: end if
23: ifCons 2then equation ( 13)
24: Rt=Rt+1 equation( 14)
25: end if
26: ifUAV(i)/∈/Omega1then
27: Rt=Rt+R/Omega1 equation( 15)
28: end if
29: observe Si+1
30: observe Rt
31: update system with UA Vs new locations
32: save(Si,Ai,ri,Si+1)in replay memory
33: sample a minibatch of (Si,Ai,ri,Si+1)
34: θold←θ
35: error=Rt+γV(Si+1)−V(Si)
36: end if
37: end if
38: end for
39: end for
40: end for
41:end for
the new state and total reward are computed to update the
system of the new environment (lines 37 and 38). To improvedecision accuracy, we select random samples from the replay
buffer (line 33) into a minibatch at each step. The saved values
are used to update the network parameters (lines 34 and 35).The aforementioned mechanism is known as experience replay,
and it is used to stabilize learning.
IV . S
IMULATION RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
In this section, the evaluation of our system model is
presented, and a comparison with other baseline and recently
proposed models is conducted. To achieve a fair comparison,
we applied the same conﬁguration of the environment in dif-ferent comparative methods. The same conﬁgurations include
applying the same number and type of UA Vs, the same size
of the cells, the same number and type of requests, and thesame number of cells. Parameters are described in the follow-
ing paragraph. Furthermore, we evaluate our system in terms
Authorized licensed use limited to: Hanoi University of Science & Technology. Downloaded on March 12,2026 at 08:24:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- PAGE 11 ---

DHUHEIR et al.: DEEP REINFORCEMENT LEARNING 8195
TABLE II
SIMULATION PARAMETERS
of the accuracy of respecting different constraints, the latency
of making ﬁnal classiﬁcation decisions, shared data, and theQoS of the system. In terms of QoS, we compare our results
with two state-of-the-art works, which use the sigmoid demand
algorithm and linear demand algorithm. The latency is deﬁnedas the delay from capturing an image from the ground until
making the ﬁnal classiﬁcation decision. The shared data is the
total data transmitted between devices in the swarm. Moreover,the accuracy is deﬁned as the percentage of respecting the con-
straints of the two tasks (path planning and layers allocations)
after the convergence. Finally, the QoS of our system modelis deﬁned as the level of visiting the hot cells and providing
services to the hot cells.
Our system covers a surveillance scenario. In the sim-
ulation testing, we used three different CNN networks, a
small CNN network, namely, LeNet (two convolutional lay-
ers and three fully connected layers), which is trained with
32×32×3 RGB sized image, a medium-sized CNN network,
namely, AlexNet (ﬁve convolutional layers and three fullyconnected layers), which is trained with a 227 ×227×3
RGB-sized image, and ﬁnally, the VGG16 CNN network
(13 convolutional layers and 3 fully connected layers) whichis trained with a 224 ×224×3 RGB-sized image. The UA Vs
are endowed with a camera to capture an image from the
monitored area and launch the inference request.
We adopted an area of 100 m ×100 m to be covered by
the connected participants, in which we used 25 cells with
20 m width and 20 m length. Furthermore, we used three dif-ferent types of UA Vs that belong to the family of Raspberry pi
B+[45]. Particularly, all types are characterized by a 1.4-GHz
64-bit quad-core processor and 1-GB RAM while they have adifferent number of multiplications per second e
i[18] which
are 560, 512, and 256. We emphasize that our classiﬁcation
request generation follows a Poisson process. The algorithmof our system model is validated using the parameters sum-
marized in Table II. We emphasize that these parameters are
empirically chosen, and we believe that similar systems will
perform identically.
Figs. 4–6show the result of the variation of the cumula-
tive rewards over the training episodes of LeNet, AlexNet,
and VGG16, respectively. As shown in the ﬁgures, the ﬁrst
process is the exploration, where the agent starts learningthe optimal policy and then starts increasing until it con-
verges to the maximum cumulative reward. Moreover, VGG16
Fig. 4. Average cumulative rewards for LeNet.
Fig. 5. Average cumulative rewards for AlexNet.
requires fewer episodes to converge and learn the optimalpolicy of executing the process and doing the multitask oper-
ation because the episode length in VGG-16 is longer thanthe small CNN network such as LeNet, and the medium CNN
network, AlexNet. We added to these graphs the line of max-
imum reward that the RL policy tries to pursue. This line isimpossible to reach as we have a penalty related to latency.
However, we can see that our algorithm can accomplish near-
optimum results, and our system model is performing well.Fig. 7shows the convergence of penalties. In other words, it
shows the main objective of the RL, which is minimizing the
latency of calculating the classiﬁcation decision. It starts to behigh; then, the system learns how to decrease the penalty of
calculating the latency until converging to the minimum that
the swarm of UA Vs can achieve.
In Fig. 8, we present the accuracy graphs for different CNN
models. In these graphs, we show the capacity of respectingthe constraints, calculated after the convergence, which means
after the system learns the optimal allocation as well as the
path planning of the connected UA Vs that leads to the min-imum latency of executing the ﬁnal classiﬁcation decisions.
The simulated results were conducted in three different CNN
Authorized licensed use limited to: Hanoi University of Science & Technology. Downloaded on March 12,2026 at 08:24:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- PAGE 12 ---

8196 IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 10, NO. 9, 1 MAY 2023
Fig. 6. Average cumulative rewards for VGG16.
Fig. 7. Average penalties.
networks, 5-layers LeNet, 8-layers Alexnet, and 16-layers
VGG. The accuracy percentage of LeNet is 96.45%, AlexNetis 91.23%, and VGG16 is 82.50%.
Due to the np-hardness of the problem in ( 8), it is difﬁ-
cult to calculate the optimal solution; hence, we evaluated theproblem by calculating the suboptimal solution of the main
objective function. To calculate the suboptimal solution, we
ﬁxed one variable and run the optimization problem for theother one, and we tried to run it for the maximum of possible
values. Then, the values that give the minimum latency are
chosen.
Figs. 9and10compare the solution of the suboptimal and
RL in terms of cumulative latency and shared data. We adopt
5-layer LeNet with Raspberry pi 3B +and 5 UA Vs in this
evaluation. From the ﬁgures, the difference between the two
solutions is negligible at the beginning; it increases as thenumber of requests increases to a max of 40% at 25 requests
which is an extreme scenario that may not be realistic in the
case of using ﬁve UA V devices.
Fig. 11shows the total latency of batches of requests when
using Raspberry pi devices with different memory capacities.
Fig. 8. Accuracy comparison of different UA Vs.
Fig. 9. Comparing optimal and RL solutions in terms of latency.
Fig. 10. Comparing optimal and RL solutions in terms of shared data.
As shown in the ﬁgure, as the memory capacities of the devices
increase, the latency of the inference decreases. For example,the latencies of the devices when e=512 and e=560 are
quite similar when the number of requests is low, and the
Authorized licensed use limited to: Hanoi University of Science & Technology. Downloaded on March 12,2026 at 08:24:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- PAGE 13 ---

DHUHEIR et al.: DEEP REINFORCEMENT LEARNING 8197
Fig. 11. Average total latency of batches of requests for different types of
devices.
Fig. 12. Cumulative shared data among devices with different memorycapacities.
difference starts to be notiﬁed when the number of requests
increases and the load becomes higher. The memory capacity
becomes challenging at the higher number of requests, and
the devices need to exploit all their resources to handle allrequests. Furthermore, we can see that the average total latency
of 20 requests for the lowest device capacity is 10.68 s. It
means that the latency per request is equal to 0.53 s. Whenhaving ten requests, the average latency is 5.34 s. For the high-
est device capacity, for 20 requests, the average total latency
is 5.22 s, where the average latency per request is 0.26 s, andin the case of having ten requests, the total average latency is
2.6 s. This proves the capacity of our system to run inference
requests with low latency.
Fig. 12shows the shared data between UA V devices in the
swarm. In this simulation, we compare different Raspberry pidevices while varying the capacity of the memory, and we
adopt AlexNet as the network used for classiﬁcation. It is clear
that as the memory capacity increases, the system incurs lessshared data. This result is related to the incapability of the
UA Vs with low memory capacity to accomplish the whole
Fig. 13. Minimum number of UA Vs to respect constraints, LeNet distribution
using Raspberry pi 3B +device with ﬁve requests.
Fig. 14. QoS simulation results.
classiﬁcation onboard; hence they resort to distributing a part
of the inference tasks.
Our approach contains two essential tasks (layers allocation
and path planning). In order to satisfy these two tasks, the
number of UA Vs should be sufﬁcient to complete their tasks
successfully, and there is a minimum number of UA V devicesin which lower than this number (threshold), the mission can-
not be completed or completed with high latency and/or high
interference due to their available resources. In Fig. 13,w e
present the minimum number of UA Vs to start respecting the
two constraints. Moreover, the minimum number of UA Vs
required to satisfy the mission depends on the number of cells.Clearly, the larger the number of cells, the more UA Vs are
required to achieve the mission.
Figs. 14and15depict the QoS. The QoS is deﬁned as how
many times the UA Vs visit the hot cells and provide services
(capture requests and send them for classiﬁcation) to thesecells. The QoS coefﬁcient factor S
fencourages the agent to
visit these hot cells by increasing the total reward that is based
on (15). Fig. 14shows that when the QoS coefﬁcient factor Sf
is 0, i.e., there is no reward for covering hot cells, our RL-agent
gives a result of around (0.56); however, when Sf=1, the
Authorized licensed use limited to: Hanoi University of Science & Technology. Downloaded on March 12,2026 at 08:24:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- PAGE 14 ---

8198 IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 10, NO. 9, 1 MAY 2023
Fig. 15. Convergence performance of rewards related to QoS for AlexNet,
Sf=1.
Fig. 16. Total latency of different models.
agent knows that there is a reward from traversing through
these hot cells, so it encourages the UA Vs to pass throughthese cells and provide services to them. We compared our
result with two baseline works [ 14], [25], and we can see that
when the QoS coefﬁcient increases, our model does better thanthe other two models and provide services to all the hot cells
in the ground. In these works, the authors used multi-UA Vs to
provide services to ground users, and these users have demandrequests that need to be accomplished while UA Vs plan their
trajectory path to arrive at their destinations. The study in [ 14]
used a sigmoid demand algorithm to fulﬁll the services of theusers, while the study in [ 25] used a linear demand algorithm.
Our work outperforms these two works in which we assumed
that we have hot cells, and inside these hot cells, demand
services are needed to be fulﬁlled; hence, the UA Vs traverse
through these cells and provide services. Our work is basedon the reward that is given to the agent, and when this reward
is higher, the agent encourages the connected UA Vs to visit
these cells; therefore, when the services factor of ( 15)i sh i g h ,
the agent learns the optimal policy and cover these hot cells.
Fig. 15shows the convergence of rewards related to QoS when
Fig. 17. Accuracy comparison of different algorithms.
using Raspberry pi with e=560. We can see that the model
starts learning from past experiences until it converges to 1,
which means that the swarm is able to provide services to all
hot cells.
Fig. 16shows a comparison of our system to the
approach in [ 19], namely, optimal UA V-based layer distribu-
tion (OULD). In this model, the authors minimize the latencyof the ﬁnal prediction of the captured requests after assign-
ing CNN layers; however, the paths of UA Vs are static, and
they are already planned for the UA Vs at the initialization ofthe system. In our approach, the UA Vs’ paths are optimized to
minimize the latency of the ﬁnal prediction. For a fair compar-
ison, we applied the same DRL algorithm, the PPO algorithm,
with the same input parameters to both system models. It is
clear that our system is outperforming OULD in terms oflatency as the paths of UA Vs are optimized to ﬁnd the trajec-
tory that produces the least latency. Moreover, we compare our
approach to two different baselines: 1) the greedy heuristic and2) the random selection strategy. In the heuristic solution, the
paths are static, and the UA Vs’ availabilities are checked. The
one that provides the least latency and has enough resources toexecute the subsequent layer will be chosen. We note that the
requests are served one by one greedily. The main difference
between the heuristic solution and the OULD approach is thatthe RL algorithm in OULD has the knowledge about the whole
path that UA Vs follow; however, the heuristic solution has the
knowledge of only the next location where the UA V will ﬂy;therefore the latency OULD system is better than the latency
produced by the heuristic solution. In the random selection
baseline approach, the UA Vs randomly move, and the resultof average latency is the worst due to the random movements
of UA Vs, and hence it is not adequate for online transmis-
sions. Compared to the OULD system, the heuristic solution,
and the random selection, our system optimizes the UA V’s
movements to minimize the delay of the captured requests;hence, it accomplishes the best results in terms of latency.
In Fig. 17, we compare our PPO algorithm to a com-
monly used RL algorithm, namely, the Actor–Critic algorithm.Both algorithms converge to the maximum reward represented
by the black horizontal line in the ﬁgure. As we can see,
Authorized licensed use limited to: Hanoi University of Science & Technology. Downloaded on March 12,2026 at 08:24:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- PAGE 15 ---

DHUHEIR et al.: DEEP REINFORCEMENT LEARNING 8199
Fig. 18. Average cumulative rewards when varying the number of UA Vs.
Fig. 19. Average cumulative rewards under a dynamic environment.
the PPO algorithm outperforms the Actor–Critic algorithm in
terms of optimality, even though the Actor–Critic convergesfaster. Clearly, the PPO algorithm takes more time to learn
the optimal layers allocation and plan the path of UA Vs; how-
ever, it learns a better policy compared to the Actor–Critic.Finally, the accuracy of respecting the constraints of PPO is
94%, whereas Actor–Critic achieves 88%.
Fig. 18refers to the comparison between swarms enclosing
different numbers of UA Vs in terms of average cumulative
rewards. As the number of UA Vs increases, the convergence
to the maximum rewards becomes faster as the agent hasenough choices to choose from among the available UA Vs.
In Fig. 19, we test changing the environment of the learning.
This can help us test the prompt adaptability of our system
to any changes knowing that the number of UA Vs can be
increased or decreased at any time to go to the charging sta-tion, for example, and rejoin the swarm after a period of time
when the battery is fully charged. Particularly, the system starts
with three UA Vs, and it converges to the maximum rewards.After converging, one UA V is assumed to join the swarm.
The accuracy is decreased as the agent tries to learn the newenvironment, then it can reconverge rapidly to the maximum
rewards where four UA Vs are deployed. Decreasing the num-ber of UA Vs shows the same performance. More speciﬁcally,
the cumulative rewards drop when the conﬁguration of the
system changes and then increase again after a small learningperiod.
V. C
ONCLUSION
In this article, we introduced a distributed system model of
a swarm of UA Vs while planning the trajectory path of UA Vs.The system model is designed to overcome the limitations of
classifying the captured image in remote servers by disrupt-
ing the task into segments and executing these segments in theconnected UA Vs by exploiting the limited capacities of UA Vs.
Simultaneously, the UA Vs draw their path to cover the moni-
tored region and focus on hot cell locations to capture requests.
We formulated the distributed system model as an optimization
problem that seeks to minimize the latency of making theﬁnal classiﬁcation decision while ﬁnding the best path that the
UA V can pass through to mitigate interference. The formulated
problem is np-hard, and it is not adequate for real-time appli-cations. Therefore, we introduced an online solution based
on the RL algorithm that is possible for dynamic models
and suitable for real-time applications. Our simulation resultsdemonstrated the effectiveness of our proposed solution to
minimize the latency and improve the accuracy of respect-
ing the constraints. In our future work, we plan to study thesecurity of transmitting data as these applications require high-
security transmission and achieve high reliability. Moreover,
we plan to study the effect of interference on transmissionlatency when controlling channel communication under dif-
ferent modes like an LoS and an NLoS. Furthermore, we plan
to investigate the Doppler effect of moving UA Vs as it affectsthe interference of transmission between moving objects.
A
CKNOWLEDGMENT
The ﬁndings herein reﬂect the work, and are solely the
responsibility, of the authors.
REFERENCES
[1] M. B. Bejiga, A. Zeggada, A. Noufﬁdj, and F. Melgani, “A convolu-
tional neural network approach for assisting avalanche search and rescueoperations with UA V imagery,” Remote Sens. , vol. 9, no. 2, p. 100,
2017.
[2] A. Al-Kaff, D. Martín, F. García, A. de la Escalera, and
J. M. Armingol, “Survey of computer vision algorithms and applicationsfor unmanned aerial vehicles,” Expert Syst. Appl. , vol. 92, pp. 447–463,
Feb. 2018.
[3] S. Sawadsitang, D. Niyato, P.-S. Tan, and P. Wang, “Joint ground and
aerial package delivery services: A stochastic optimization approach,”
IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. , vol. 20, no. 6, pp. 2241–2254,
Jun. 2019.
[4] N. Kalatzis, M. Avgeris, D. Dechouniotis, K. Papadakis-
Vlachopapadopoulos, I. Roussaki, and S. Papavassiliou, “Edgecomputing in IoT ecosystems for UA V-enabled early ﬁre detection,”inProc. IEEE Int. Conf. Smart Comput. (SMARTCOMP) , 2018,
pp. 106–114.
[5] K. Kanistras, G. Martins, M. J. Rutherford, and K. P. Valavanis, “A
survey of unmanned aerial vehicles (UA Vs) for trafﬁc monitoring,” in
Proc. Int. Conf. Unmanned Aircraft. Syst. (ICUAS) , 2013, pp. 221–234.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Hanoi University of Science & Technology. Downloaded on March 12,2026 at 08:24:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- PAGE 16 ---

8200 IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 10, NO. 9, 1 MAY 2023
[6] Q. Wu et al., “A comprehensive overview on 5G-and-beyond networks
with UA Vs: From communications to sensing and intelligence,” 2020,arXiv:2010.09317 .
[7] J.-C. Padró, F.-J. Muñoz, J. Planas, and X. Pons, “Comparison of four
UA V georeferencing methods for environmental monitoring purposes
focusing on the combined use with airborne and satellite remote sensingplatforms,” Int. J. Appl. Earth Observ. Geoinf. , vol. 75, pp. 130–140,
Mar. 2019.
[8] L. Bashmal and Y . Bazi, “Learning robust deep features for efﬁcient
classiﬁcation of UA V imagery,” in Proc. 1st Int. Conf. Comput. Appl.
Inf. Security (ICCAIS) , 2018, pp. 1–4.
[9] B. Yang, X. Cao, C. Yuen, and L. Qian, “Ofﬂoading optimization in
edge computing for deep-learning-enabled target tracking by Internetof UA Vs,” IEEE Internet Things J. , vol. 8, no. 12, pp. 9878–9893,
Jun. 2021.
[10] A. Chriki, H. Touati, H. Snoussi, and F. Kamoun, “UA V-GCS centralized
data-oriented communication architecture for crowd surveillance appli-cations,” in Proc. 15th Int. Wireless Commun. Mobile Comput. Conf.
(IWCMC) , 2019, pp. 2064–2069.
[11] H. Huang, Y . Yang, H. Wang, Z. Ding, H. Sari, and F. Adachi, “Deep
reinforcement learning for UA V navigation through massive MIMOtechnique,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol. , vol. 69, no. 1, pp. 1117–1121,
Jan. 2020.
[12] Z. Zhao, K. M. Barijough, and A. Gerstlauer, “DeepThings: Distributed
adaptive deep learning inference on resource-constrained IoT edge clus-ters,” IEEE Trans. Comput.-Aided Design Integr. Circuits Syst. , vol. 37,
no. 11, pp. 2348–2359, Nov. 2018.
[13] E. Baccour et al., “Pervasive AI for IoT applications: A survey
on resource-efﬁcient distributed artiﬁcial intelligence,” IEEE Commun.
Surveys Tuts. , vol. 24, no. 4, pp. 2366–2418, 1st Quart., 2022.
[14] H. Chang, Y . Chen, B. Zhang, and D. Doermann, “Multi-UA V mobile
edge computing and path planning platform based on reinforcementlearning,” IEEE Trans. Emerg. Topics Comput. Intell. , vol. 6, no. 3,
pp. 489–498, Jun. 2022.
[15] S. Jeong, O. Simeone, and J. Kang, “Mobile edge computing via a
UA V-mounted cloudlet: Optimization of bit allocation and path plan-ning,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol. , vol. 67, no. 3, pp. 2049–2063,
Mar. 2018.
[16] S. Teerapittayanon, B. McDanel, and H.-T. Kung, “Distributed deep
neural networks over the cloud, the edge and end devices,” inProc. IEEE 37th Int. Conf. Distrib. Comput. Syst. (ICDCS) , 2017,
pp. 328–339.
[17] B. Yang et al., “Intelli-eye: An UA V tracking system with Optimized
machine learning tasks ofﬂoading,” in Proc. IEEE INFOCOM
Conf. Comput. Commun. Workshops (INFOCOM WKSHPS) , 2019,
pp. 1–6.
[18] S. Disabato, M. Roveri, and C. Alippi, “Distributed deep convolutional
neural networks for the Internet of Things,” 2019, arXiv:1908.01656 .
[19] M. Jouhari et al., “Distributed CNN inference on resource-constrained
UA Vs for surveillance systems: Design and optimization,” IEEE Internet
Things J. , vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 1227–1242, Jan. 2022.
[20] M. Dhuheir, E. Baccour, A. Erbad, S. Sabeeh, and M. Hamdi, “Efﬁcient
real-time image recognition using collaborative swarm of UA Vs and con-
volutional networks,” in Proc. Int. Wireless Commun. Mobile Comput.
(IWCMC) , 2021, pp. 1954–1959.
[21] F. Demiane, S. Sharafeddine, and O. Farhat, “An optimized UA V tra-
jectory planning for localization in disaster scenarios,” Comput. Netw. ,
vol. 179, Oct. 2020, Art. no. 107378.
[22] M. Samir, S. Sharafeddine, C. M. Assi, T. M. Nguyen, and A. Ghrayeb,
“UA V trajectory planning for data collection from time-constrained IoTdevices,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun. , vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 34–46,
Jan. 2020.
[23] H. Gedawy, A. Al-Ali, A. Mohamed, A. Erbad, and M. Guizani, “UA Vs
smart heuristics for target coverage and path planning through strategiclocations,” in Proc. Int. Wireless Commun. Mobile Comput. (IWCMC) ,
2021, pp. 278–284.
[24] Y . Hu, M. Chen, W. Saad, H. V . Poor, and S. Cui, “Distributed multi-
agent meta learning for trajectory design in wireless drone networks,”
IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun. , vol. 39, no. 10, pp. 3177–3192, Oct. 2021.
[25] Q. Liu, L. Shi, L. Sun, J. Li, M. Ding, and F. Shu, “Path plan-
ning for UA V-mounted mobile edge computing with deep reinforcementlearning,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol. , vol. 69, no. 5, pp. 5723–5728,
May 2020.
[26] J. Moon, S. Papaioannou, C. Laoudias, P. Kolios, and S. Kim, “Deep
reinforcement learning multi-UA V trajectory control for target track-ing,” IEEE Internet Things J.
, vol. 8, no. 20, pp. 15441–15455,
Oct. 2021.[27] B. Li and Y . Wu, “Path planning for UA V ground target tracking via
deep reinforcement learning,” IEEE Access , vol. 8, pp. 29064–29074,
2020.
[28] Y . Pan, Y . Yang, and W. Li, “A deep learning trained by genetic algo-
rithm to improve the efﬁciency of path planning for data collection with
multi-UA V ,” IEEE Access , vol. 9, pp. 7994–8005, 2021.
[29] Y . Wang et al., “Trajectory design for UA V-based Internet of Things
data collection: A deep reinforcement learning approach,” IEEE Internet
Things J. , vol. 9, no. 5, pp. 3899–3912, Mar. 2021.
[30] K. K. Nguyen, T. Q. Duong, T. Do-Duy, H. Claussen, and L. Hanzo,
“3D UA V trajectory and data collection optimisation via deep reinforce-
ment learning,” IEEE Trans. Commun. , vol. 70, no. 4, pp. 2358–2371,
Apr. 2022.
[31] Y .-J. Chen and D.-Y . Huang, “Joint trajectory design and BS association
for cellular-connected UA V: An imitation-augmented deep reinforce-
ment learning approach,” IEEE Internet Things J. , vol. 9, no. 4,
pp. 2843–2858, Feb. 2022.
[32] C. Cheng et al., “Machine-learning-aided trajectory prediction and con-
ﬂict detection for Internet of aerial vehicles,” IEEE Internet Things J. ,
vol. 9, no. 8, pp. 5882–5894, Apr. 2022.
[33] R. Ding, Y . Xu, F. Gao, and X. Shen, “Trajectory design and access con-
trol for air–ground coordinated communications system with multiagentdeep reinforcement learning,” IEEE Internet Things J. , vol. 9, no. 8,
pp. 5785–5798, Apr. 2022.
[34] P. Luong, F. Gagnon, L.-N. Tran, and F. Labeau, “Deep reinforce-
ment learning-based resource allocation in cooperative UA V-assistedwireless networks,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun. , vol. 20, no. 11,
pp. 7610–7625, Nov. 2021.
[35] N. Cheng et al., “Space/aerial-assisted computing ofﬂoading for IoT
applications: A learning-based approach,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun. ,
vol. 37, no. 5, pp. 1117–1129, May 2019.
[36] C. Zhou et al., “Deep reinforcement learning for delay-oriented IoT task
scheduling in SAGIN,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun. , vol. 20, no. 2,
pp. 911–925, Feb. 2021.
[37] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for image
recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. , 2016,
pp. 770–778.
[38] E. Baccour, A. Erbad, A. Mohamed, M. Hamdi, and M. Guizani,
“RL-PDNN: Reinforcement learning for privacy-aware distributed neu-
ral networks in IoT systems,” IEEE Access , vol. 9, pp. 54872–54887,
2021.
[39] U. Challita, W. Saad, and C. Bettstetter, “Interference management
for cellular-connected UA Vs: A deep reinforcement learning approach,”
IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun. , vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 2125–2140,
Apr. 2019.
[40] D. Liu, S. Xue, B. Zhao, B. Luo, and Q. Wei, “Adaptive dynamic pro-
gramming for control: A survey and recent advances,” IEEE Trans. Syst.,
Man, Cybern., Syst. , vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 142–160, Jan. 2021.
[41] J. Schulman, F. Wolski, P. Dhariwal, A. Radford, and O. Klimov,
“Proximal policy optimization algorithms,” 2017, arXiv:1707.06347 .
[42] A. T. Azar et al., “Drone deep reinforcement learning: A review,”
Electronics , vol. 10, no. 9, p. 999, 2021.
[43] J. Schulman, P. Moritz, S. Levine, M. Jordan, and P. Abbeel, “High-
dimensional continuous control using generalized advantage estimation,”
2015, arXiv:1506.02438 .
[44] E. Bøhn, E. M. Coates, S. Moe, and T. A. Johansen, “Deep reinforce-
ment learning attitude control of ﬁxed-wing UA Vs using proximal policy
optimization,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Unmanned Aircr. Syst. (ICUAS) , 2019,
pp. 523–533.
[45] H. Daryanavard and A. Hariﬁ, “Implementing face detection system on
UA V using raspberry pi platform,” in Proc. Iranian Conf. Elect. Eng.
(ICEE) , 2018, pp. 1720–1723.
Marwan Dhuheir received the master’s degree
from Kocaeli University, Kocaeli, Turkey, in 2019.
He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree withthe Department of Information and Computing
Technology, Hamad Bin Khalifa University, Doha,
Qatar.
His research interests include machine learning,
unmanned aerial vehicles, wireless communications,
deep reinforcement learning, and edge computing.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Hanoi University of Science & Technology. Downloaded on March 12,2026 at 08:24:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- PAGE 17 ---

DHUHEIR et al.: DEEP REINFORCEMENT LEARNING 8201
Emna Baccour received the Ph.D. degree in com-
puter science from the University of Burgundy,Dijon, France, in 2017.
She was a Postdoctoral Fellow with Qatar
University, Doha, Qatar, on a project covering
the interconnection networks for massive data cen-ters and then on a project covering video cachingand processing in mobile-edge computing networks.
She currently holds a Postdoctoral Fellow with
Hamad Ben Khalifa University, Ar-Rayyan, Qatar.Her research interests include data center networks,
cloud, edge and mobile computing as well as distributed systems. She is also
interested in distributed machine learning and reinforcement learning withapplication to IoT systems.
Aiman Erbad (Senior Member, IEEE) received
the B.Sc. degree in computer engineering from the
University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA, in2004, the Master of Computer Science degree inembedded systems and robotics from the University
of Essex, Colchester, U.K., in 2005, and the Ph.D.
degree in computer science from The Universityof British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada, in2012.
He is an Associate Professor and the ICT Division
Head of the College of Science and Engineering,
Hamad Bin Khalifa University, Doha, Qatar. Prior to this, he was an Associate
Professor with the Computer Science and Engineering Department and the
Director of Research Planning and Development, Qatar University, Doha, untilMay 2020. He also served as the Director of Research Support responsiblefor all grants and contracts from 2016 to 2018 and the Computer Engineering
Program Coordinator from 2014 to 2016. His research received funding from
the Qatar National Research Fund, and his research outcomes were publishedin respected international conferences and journals. His research interests spancloud computing, edge intelligence, Internet of Things, private and secure
networks, and multimedia systems.
Dr. Erbad received the Platinum Award from H.H. The Emir Sheikh Tamim
bin Hamad Al Thani at the Education Excellence Day 2013 (Ph.D. cate-gory). He also received the 2020 Best Research Paper Award from Computer
Communications, the IWCMC 2019 Best Paper Award, and the IEEE CCWC
2017 Best Paper Award. He is an Editor of KSII Transactions on Internet and
Information Systems and the International Journal of Sensor Networks and a
Guest Editor of IEEE N
ETWORK . He is the General Chair of ISNCC 2023.
He also served as a Program Chair of IWCMC 2019 and IWCMC 2022, a
Publicity Chair of the ACM MoVid Workshop 2015, a Local ArrangementChair of NOSSDA V 2011, and a Technical Program Committee Member in
various IEEE and ACM international conferences (GlobeCom, NOSSDA V ,
MMSys, ACMMM, IC2E, and ICNC). He is a Senior Member of ACM.
Sinan Sabeeh Al-Obaidi received the B.Sc.
degree in electrical engineering from Texas A&MUniversity at Qatar, Doha, Qatar, in 2011 throughan honorary scholarship from Her Highness Sheikha
Moza Bint Nasser Al-Missnad, the M.Eng. and
Ph.D. degrees from the Electrical EngineeringDepartment, Texas A&M University at CollegeStation, College Station, TX, USA, in 2014 and
2018, respectively, through a scholarship offered by
Qatar Research and Leadership Program from QatarFoundation.
He currently directs a portfolio of projects in autonomous systems as the
Manager of Engineering with the Research and Development Directorate,Barzan Holdings QSTP LLC, Doha, Research and Development—EngineeringDepartment for Defense and Security Applications.
Mounir Hamdi (Fellow, IEEE) received the B.S.
degree (Hons.) in electrical engineering (computer
engineering) from the University of Louisiana at
Lafayette, Lafayette, LA, USA, in 1985, and theM.S. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering
from the University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA,
USA, in 1987 and 1991, respectively.
He is currently the Founding Dean of the College
of Science and Engineering, Hamad Bin Khalifa
University, Doha, Qatar. He was a Chair Professor
and a Founding Member of The Hong Kong
University of Science and Technology (HKUST), Hong Kong, where he wasalso the Head of the Department of Computer Science and Engineering.
From 1999 to 2000, he was a Visiting Professor with Stanford University,
Stanford, CA, USA, and the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology, Lausanne,Switzerland. His area of research is in high-speed wired/wireless networking,in which he has published more than 400 publications, graduated more 60
M.S./Ph.D. students, and awarded numerous research awards and grants.
Dr. Hamdi was awarded many best research paper awards, such as ICC and
Globecom. In addition, he has frequently consulted for companies and gov-ernmental organizations in the USA, Europe, and Asia. He is also a frequent
keynote speaker in international conferences and forums. He is/was on the
editorial board of more than ten prestigious journals and magazines. He haschaired more than 20 international conferences and workshops. In addition to
his commitment to research and academic/professional service, he is also a
Dedicated Teacher and a Quality Assurance Educator. He received the Best10 Lecturer Award and the Distinguished Engineering Teaching AppreciationAward from HKUST. He is frequently involved in higher education quality
assurance activities as well as engineering programs accreditation all over the
world. He is a Fellow of the IEEE for his signiﬁcant contributions to the“design and analysis of high-speed packet switching.”
Authorized licensed use limited to: Hanoi University of Science & Technology. Downloaded on March 12,2026 at 08:24:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 