--- PAGE 1 ---

Holistic Path Planning for
Multi-Drone Data Collection
Jonathan Diller
Colorado School of Mines, USA
jdiller@mines.eduPeter Hall
Colorado School of Mines, USA
peterhall@mines.eduQi Han
Colorado School of Mines, USA
qhan@mines.edu
Abstract —This paper presents how to plan for and deploy a
team of Unmanned Aerial V ehicles (UA Vs) to collect data from
wireless sensors while minimizing collection latency. We propose
a holistic solution for this problem where we ﬁrst form an ofﬂine
plan while considering communication and energy constraints
then derive an online strategy for the UA Vs to handle sensor
failures and the stochastic nature of wireless communication.
For ofﬂine planning, we propose a heuristic-based algorithm
that turns the problem into a variation of the V ehicle Routing
Problem. For our online strategy, we propose a coupled ofﬂine-
online algorithm that adapts UA V behavior as needed. We
evaluate our algorithms through extensive simulations as well
as a proof-of-concept implementation on a physical UA V and
wireless sensor testbed.
Index T erms —UA V path planning, data collection
I. I NTRODUCTION
Wireless sensors are used in a variety of application areas
including environmental, ﬂora and fauna, industrial, urban,
military and health monitoring. Traditionally, these sensors
have been connected to form larger networks so that data can
be forwarded to a central data center through multi-hop routing
[1]. A drawback to this approach is that the nodes closest to
data sinks become weak points in the network. To mitigate this
problem, a lot of research has looked into collecting data via
mobile agents, so called “data-mules” [2]. Unmanned Aerial
Vehicles (UA Vs) are often proposed for data-muling because
they can easily traverse rugged terrain and reach areas that are
challenging for humans and ground robots to access. Rotary
UA Vs (commonly called drones) are particularly well adapted
for data collection because of their agility and the ability to
hover in place while communicating with ground nodes.
Although drones have many advantages for data-muling,
there are several challenges that must be considered when
planning routes for data collection tasks. One major challenge
in using drones is their ﬁnite on-board energy storage, re-
quiring them to periodically recharge or change out on-board
batteries. Another challenge is that drones take much longer
to collect data from sensors compared with the traditional
connected network approach. This motivates the need to form
optimal collection paths and minimize the total data collection
time.
There are several proposed path planning algorithms in
recent literature for minimizing data collection time via drones.
Common solutions for multi-drone scenarios include biology
inspired approaches such as genetic algorithms [3] or antcolony algorithms [4], advanced Traveling Salesman Problem
solvers [5], and learned methods [6]. Although some of
these works consider drone energy constraints, none of them
incorporate swapping out batteries to extend the range of the
drones.
Another key aspect that is missing in current solutions is
taking a holistic approach to solve the data-muling problem.
Due to the stochastic nature of wireless communication, a data
collection plan found ofﬂine may falter during deployment
when sensors become weak and stop responding. Additionally,
none of the existing literature has evaluated their proposed
solution on a physical testbed with wireless sensors and an
autonomous drone.
In this study, we formulate a holistic framework for minimiz-
ing the maximum data latency in the multi-drone data muling
problem. We deﬁne data latency as the time lapsed from the
beginning of the data collection mission until a particular piece
of sensor data has been returned to the data sink.
In this paper we make the following contributions.
1) We present a holistic framework that goes from cen-
tralized, ofﬂine planning to decentralized, online control
decision making for the multi-drone data muling prob-
lem.
2) We design an ofﬂine multi-drone path planning algo-
rithm for collecting data from wireless sensors that
accounts for realistic drone energy consumption and
incorporates battery swaps in the planning process.
3) We propose a coupled ofﬂine-online strategy for dealing
with the stochastic nature of wireless communication.
4) We evaluate our holistic approach through extensive
simulations and on a physical testbed consisting of a
drone and multiple wireless sensor nodes.
II. P ROBLEM FORMULA TION
We consider a scenario with nwireless sensors deployed
throughout a three-dimensional space Xbased on application
needs. Let S={s1,s2,···,sn}be the set of all sensors, each
of which is static. Let the position of siin three-dimensional
space be xi∈X , which is known a priori. Each sensor is
gathering application-speciﬁc data that must be collected by a
drone and returned to a data center located at xb∈X . LetA=
{a1,a2,···,ak}be a set of kdrones that will be launched
from the data center at xband must collect all of the captured
data from the sensors and return it to xb. We assume that
2222023 19th International Conference on Distributed Computing in Smart Systems and the Internet of Things (DCOSS-
IoT)
2325-2944/23/$31.00 ©2023 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/DCOSS-IoT58021.2023.000462023 19th International Conference on Distributed Computing in Smart Systems and the Internet of Things (DCOSS-IoT) | 979-8-3503-4649-7/23/$31.00 ©2023 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/DCOSS-IOT58021.2023.00046
Authorized licensed use limited to: Hanoi University of Science & Technology. Downloaded on March 12,2026 at 08:21:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- PAGE 2 ---

  ruav   
 ri''
 ri'   ri  
  ri'  α - β  
Fig. 1: Example of the service range of a sensor. The green
circles represent the communication ranges for sensor iand
the drone, respectively, while the purple ellipse represents the
data transmission range.
each drone will maintain a constant altitude (ﬂight-level) α.
We formally deﬁne a drone sub-tour Tas an ordered sequence
of points in Xthat start and end with xb.
A. Communication Model
We deﬁne servicing a sensor as a drone connecting wire-
lessly with a sensor and collecting all data held on that
sensor. We deﬁne the communication range of device aas
the farthest straight-line distance that another device bcan be
away from aand still receive data packets from a. To service
a sensor, the drone and sensor must be within each other’s
communication range, which we term the data transmission
range . Given communication ranges r/prime/prime
iandruavfor sensor si
and a drone, respectively, then the data transmission range is
r/prime
i=min(r/prime/prime
i,ruav). Suppose that siis deployed at altitude
βand the drone’s ﬁxed operating altitude is α. We deﬁne
the service range as the distance away from the zenith of
siat altitude αthat the drone must be to communicate with
si. This makes si’s service range ri=/radicalbig
r/prime2
i−(α−β)2.
Figure 1 depicts these varying distances. We assume that
r/prime/prime
iandruav are both known a priori because they can be
measured experimentally while deploying the sensors.
The wireless sensors in Shave varying volumes of data to
be collected. Let tibe the amount of time that a UA V must be
within the service range of sensor sito collect all of the data
fromsi. Determining tican be done using methods such as
the Transmission Model described in [5]. For simplicity, we
disregard how varying distances may impact tiand leave this
for future work.
LetTibe a drone sub-tour. Each Tiwill be accompanied
by a sensor list, Si, of all sensors to be serviced on Ti. The
total time spent servicing the sensors on Tiwill be
ts(Si)=/summationdisplay
l∈S itl (1)
We assume that only a single sensor will communicate with
the drone at a time but acknowledge that in practice packet
collision can be handled by the MAC layer protocol.
B. Energy Model
Drones have limited on-board energy, usually in the form
of batteries, and can only operate for so long before needing
to either swap-out batteries or recharge. Previous works haveshown that drone power consumption is a function of drone
speed [7], [8], which was veriﬁed by [9]. Let P(v)be the
function that maps speed vto power. If given an approximation
forP(v)and a battery’s parameters, we could determine the
total operating time of the drone. Let
st(v)=BrateVbat
P(v)(2)
be the total operating time of the drone while moving at speed
vwhereBrate is the battery depletion rate (in amp-seconds)
andVbatis the battery voltage. We will assume that the drone’s
speed is ﬁxed during the data collection mission (ether moving
at a predetermined speed vmor hovering, denoted as vh=0).
Letsmbe the total amount of time that the drone can travel
atvmandshbe the total amount of time that the drone can
hover. Formally,
sm=st(vm)=BrateVbat
P(vm), (3)
sh=st(vh)=BrateVbat
P(vh). (4)
We base a drone’s energy budget on potential-seconds of
travel (ρ). Initially, a drone starts with smρbased on a full
battery. If the Euclidean distance from location xitoxjis
di,jthen ﬂying from xitoxjwill consume f(i, j)=di,j
vmρ. To convert time spent hovering into ρwe use the ratiosm
sh,
so hovering for a duration of tseconds will consumesm
shtρ.
We denote tias the amount of time required to service sensor
si(in real time) and t/prime
i=sm
shtias amount of ρrequired to
servicesi.
Each sub-tour Tican be viewed as a sequence of edges,
(i,j), that connect consecutive waypoints xi,xj∈T i. The
total time to travel through each sub-tour Tiwill be
td(Ti)=/summationdisplay
(i,j)∈T idi,j
vm(5)
The total time to complete sub-tour Ti,ttot
i, will be the sum of
the time to travel through the sub-tour and the time to service
all sensors on the sub-tour. Mathematically,
ttot
i=ts(Si)+td(Ti) (6)
Similarly, the total energy, stot
ito complete Tiinρwill be
stot
i=/summationdisplay
(i,j)∈T if(i, j)+/summationdisplay
l∈S it/prime
l (7)
Each drone ajwill have a collection of sub-tours, Kj, that
contains one or more sub-tours and sensor list pairs, TiandSi,
respectively. Between consecutive sub-tours, the drone must
have its battery swapped out at the data center. Let tbbe the
time required to swap out batteries. Then the total mission
duration of drone ajwill be
Ttot
j=/summationdisplay
{Ti,Si}∈K jttot
i+tb (8)
Note that for the ﬁrst sub-tour of each vehicle tb=0 .W e
would also like to point out that tbis only the time required
223
Authorized licensed use limited to: Hanoi University of Science & Technology. Downloaded on March 12,2026 at 08:21:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- PAGE 3 ---

to swap-out batteries and the distance required to travel back
to the data center at the end of each sub-tour is included in
eachTi.
C. Problem Deﬁnition
We can now formally deﬁne the Multi-Drone Data-Muling
Problem (MDDMP). Given a set of nsensors, data center
location (xb), and a team of kdrones, ﬁnd a set of drone
routes such that
min max
jTtot
j,j∈A (9)
where every sensor siis in anSj, and
stot
j≤sm,j∈A (10)
III. H OLISTIC PAT H -PLANNING FRAMEWORK
This work presents a holistic framework for solving the
Multi-Drone Data-Muling Problem (MDDMP) that ﬁrst looks
at ofﬂine planning then online adaptive strategies. Figure 2
shows an overview of our holistic framework for the data-
muling problem.
We ﬁrst ﬁnd an ofﬂine solution to the MDDMP that
ﬁnds sub-tours for individual drones while considering energy
constraints. We then use a coupled ofﬂine-online strategy that
ﬁrst pre-processes the found sub-tours in the ofﬂine plan
then deploys an online plan on the individual drones. During
mission execution, the drones record mission statistics, such as
actual communication ranges and data collection times, which
we then use as feedback to update our approximations in the
ofﬂine planner for the next time the drones are deployed.
MDDMP
Planning
Sensor
OrderingAdaptive
online controllerOffline Online
Centralized,
offline planner
Coupled Offline-Online
StrategyOffline Plan
Online
PlanDeployment
Statistics
Fig. 2: Overview of our holistic framework.
A. Centralized Ofﬂine Planner
Algorithm 1 lists the details of our ofﬂine algorithm for the
MDDMP. We start by ﬁxing m, the total number of sub-tours,
on line 1. We then consider the point above each sensor and
treat the problem as a traditional Vehicle Routing Problem
(VRP) with mvehicles, which we solve on line 3. Once we
have found a solution to the VRP, we attempt to improve
each sub-tour by using a variety of route tightening heuristics
on lines 4-8. We then verify that our found tours are under
the energy budget expressed in Equation (10) and run a job
scheduling algorithm to assign sub-tours to drones on lines 9-
11. We then increment the ﬁxed number of sub-tours and
repeat these steps until we either no longer see an improvement(a) (b)
Fig. 3: Example results of the standard VRP solution ( a) and
the tightening heuristics ( b).
in worst latency and mis a multiple of the number of drones
ormhas become larger than the number of sensors and return
the best found set of sub-tours. We term our algorithm VRP+T .
There are many known approaches to solve the VRP. For
this work, we propose ﬁrst clustering the vertices into m
clusters using Lloyd’s k-means clustering algorithm. For each
of the clusters, we add xb(the data center’s location) into
the cluster and treat the cluster as an input for a Traveling
Salesperson Problem (TSP) and use a heuristics-based TSP
solver [10] for each problem instance.
For route tightening heuristics, we consider the service
range of each sensor (the maximum distance a drone can be
away from a sensor and still collect data) and attempt to move
the position of each waypoint. Consider a set of three adjacent
waypoints, wi,w j,w k, on a sub-tour. We attempt to move
wjto a new position that still services sj(the sensor that
matches to wj) using a variety of heuristics such as ﬁnding
the closest point along the perimeter of the service range of
sjto the straight line between wiandwk. If we can ﬁnd
a new position for wjthat improves the total travel time,
then we update wj’s position in the sub-tour and continue
to cycle through the waypoints of each sub-tour until no more
improvements can be found. We call these route improvement
Algorithm 1 Multi-Drone Data-Muling Algorithm
Input:S: set of sensor, xb: data center position
Output: K: set of drone tours
1:m←1
2:while stopping condition not met do
3:T←solve -VRP (S, x b,m)
4: while improvement found do
5: for(i,j)and(j,k)∈T do
6: attempt to update j
7: end for
8: end while
9: ifeachTi∈T is under energy budget then
10:Km←job-scheduling (T)
11: end if
12:m←m+1
13: end while
14: return best found Km
224
Authorized licensed use limited to: Hanoi University of Science & Technology. Downloaded on March 12,2026 at 08:21:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- PAGE 4 ---


    	






 !"
 !"
(a)
	
	
	







(b)
Fig. 4: Graph of worst latency from simulation results while
increasing the number of sensors ( a) and the density of the
sensors ( b).
steps tightening heuristics because they resemble pulling on
a rope that runs through several ﬁxed rings until it is tight.
Figure 3 shows an example of this process.
Observe that solving the VRP will be dominated by the
underlying TSP solver. The solver in [10] has an approximate
time complexity of O(n2.2)and will dominate the time
complexity of the tightening heuristics and common heuristics-
based job-scheduling algorithms [11]. The outer while-loop
will run at most ntimes, making the total runtime of our
Multi-Drone Data-Muling Algorithm O(n3.2). However, in the
average case we do not anticipate the outer while-loop to run
ntimes, giving us a runtime between O(n2.2)andO(n3.2).
B. Coupled Ofﬂine-Online Strategy
We propose the following strategy to adapt drone behavior
during deployment: Suppose that at waypoint withe drone
must communicate with sensor si. If the drone is unable
to communicate with siwhile at wi, then the drone moves
towards position w/prime
i, the point directly above sensor siat
the drone’s ﬂight-level. While moving, the drone continuously
attempts to connect to si. If the drone connects to si,i t
stops and services the sensor. If the drone reaches w/prime
iwithout
connecting to si, then the drone gives up attempting to service
the sensor and continues the sub-tour.
When there are multiple sensors for a single waypoint
that are not responding, we propose using a preassembled
visit ordering. Before deploying the drone, the sensors for
each waypoint can be ordered by solving a Hamiltonian path
that goes from the waypoint, visits the location above each
sensor, then terminates at the next waypoint on the sub-tour.
We propose determining the preassembled ordering ofﬂine to
avoid having the drone perform a computationally intensive
task during deployment.
IV . S IMULATION EV ALUA TIONS
In this section we evaluate our holistic solution for the
Multi-Drone Data-Muling problem through simulation. We
generated sets of randomized sensor deployment maps for
evaluation. Unless otherwise stated, the simulation inputs have
a varying number of sensors from 10 to 200 in increments of
10 (25 maps at each increment) with a random data service
	
	

	
	



 !"
 !"
(a)
    	





 !"
(b)
Fig. 5: Graph of worst latency from simulation results while
increasing the number of drones ( a) and impact on computa-
tion time as the number of sensors increase ( b).
range from 20 mto 50 mfor each sensor and an average sensor
density of150 sensors
1km2.
A. Ofﬂine Algorithm Evaluation
We compare our algorithm ( VRP+T ) against three baseline
approaches: (1) a greedy algorithm ( Greedy ), (2) the greedy
algorithm plus our tightening heuristics ( Greedy+T ), and (3)
our own algorithm without including the tightening heuristics
(VRP ).
a)Varying Number of Sensors: Figure 4a shows the
worst data latency of running our algorithm and the baseline
approaches while increasing the number of sensors with three
drones. On average, our algorithm outperforms the standard
Greedy approach by 20.7%, the Greedy+T approach by 10.2%
and the standard VRP by 12.5%.
b)Varying Sensor Density: Figure 4b shows the worst
data latency while varying sensor densities from30sensors
1km2
up to200 sensors
1km2 with three drones and 100 sensors. Our
algorithm outperforms the Greedy approach by 22.7%, the
Greedy+T approach by 12.0% and the VRP by 13.9%.
c)Varying Number of Drones: Figure 5a shows the
worst data latency on graphs with 100 sensors while varying
the number of drones from 1 up to 10. Our algorithm outper-
forms the Greedy approach by 28.8%, the Greedy+T approach
by 24.4% and the VRP by 11.0%.
d) VRP+T Runtime: Figure 5b shows the runtime of
our VRP+T algorithm as the number of sensors increases. For
reference, the function f(n)=2.4×10−5n2.39was ﬁtted
to the runtime results. This supports our assertion that in the
average case the runtime is closer to that of the TSP solver at
O(n2.2)than the theoretical worst case of O(n3.2).
B. Online Strategy Evaluation
To evaluate the performance of our online strategy, we
used the realistic Ardupilot Software in the Loop simulator
for drone movement and the NS-3 networking simulator with
transmission powers randomized over a normal distribution to
simulate a stochastic network environment.
We compared our strategy against a failure agnostic ap-
proach that skips sensors when they fail to respond. Figure 6a
shows the worst data latency while increasing the number
225
Authorized licensed use limited to: Hanoi University of Science & Technology. Downloaded on March 12,2026 at 08:21:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- PAGE 5 ---


	
	

	 !"

#
	
"$
(a)
	
	

	 !

"
	
!#
(b)
Fig. 6: Graph of the volume of data collected in the realistic
simulator while increasing the number of sensors ( a) and the
density of the sensors ( b).
of sensors with a single drone. We found a 12.8% increase
in total data collected when compared against the failure-
agnostic approach. Figure 6b shows the worst data latency
while increasing sensor density from30sensors
1km2to200 sensors
1km2
with 50 sensors and a single drone. When increasing sensor
density we found a 14.3% increase in data collected over the
baseline. This shows that our online, adaptive strategy for
collecting data from wireless devices was effective in handling
sensor communication failures.
V. F IELD TEST
To validate the coupled ofﬂine-online methodology, we pro-
totyped the problem setup on a physical testbed. For wireless
sensors, we used a mix of Raspberry Pi 4’s and Raspberry Pi
3B+’s. We added an additional “phantom” sensor that was not
/g1/g2/g2 /g3/g2/g2 /g4/g2/g2 /g2 /g4/g2/g2 /g3/g2/g2 /g1/g2/g2 /g5/g2/g2
/g6/g7/g8/g9/g9/g10/g11/g12/g13/g14/g15/g16/g17/g18/g19/g20/g5/g2/g2/g1/g2/g2/g3/g2/g2/g4/g2/g2/g2/g4/g2/g2/g21/g7/g8/g9/g9/g10/g11/g12/g13/g14/g15/g16/g17/g18/g19/g20
Fig. 7: Drone and one of the RPs used for prototype (top left
and right, respectively) and ﬁeld test results (bottom). The blue
circle with yellow dots are the predicted RP service ranges and
node locations. The green lines depict the ofﬂine plan while
the red lines are the UA V’s GPS trace during test execution.actually deployed to represent a wireless sensor that has gone
dead. For the UA V , we used the platform described in [12].
Figure 7 shows the output of the ofﬂine plan found using
our VRP+T algorithm and the actual GPS trace of the drone.
The VRP+T algorithm found a solution with a worst latency
of 126.3 seconds while the actual worst latency on the physical
testbed was 236.3 seconds. This difference was expected
because it is challenging to accurately predict communication
ranges prior to deployment. The drone was able to eventually
connect to all sensors except for the phantom sensor.
VI. C ONCLUSIONS
In this work we presented a holistic approach to the Multi-
Drone Data-Muling problem. We ﬁrst solved this problem
ofﬂine where we minimize data latency while applying re-
alistic drone energy constraints and a model for limited com-
munication range. We then proposed a coupled ofﬂine-online
algorithm that adapts the drone’s plan during deployment. We
evaluated our framework through extensive simulations and
prototyped the scenario on a physical testbed. For future work,
we see a need to further improve ofﬂine planning models that
more accurately compare to online deployment.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Mainwaring, D. Culler, J. Polastre, R. Szewczyk, and J. Anderson,
“Wireless sensor networks for habitat monitoring,” in Proceedings of
the 1st ACM international workshop on Wireless sensor networks and
applications , 2002, pp. 88–97.
[2] D. Kim, B. H. Abay, R. Uma, W. Wu, W. Wang, and A. O. Tokuta,
“Minimizing data collection latency in wireless sensor network with
multiple mobile elements,” in Proceedings of the IEEE International
Conference on Computer Communications (INFOCOM) , 2012, pp. 504–
512.
[3] S. Alfattani, W. Jaafar, H. Yanikomeroglu, and A. Yongacoglu, “Multi-
uav data collection framework for wireless sensor networks,” in IEEE
Global Communications Conference (GLOBECOM) , 2019, pp. 1–6.
[4] Z. Qin, A. Li, C. Dong, H. Dai, and Z. Xu, “Completion time mini-
mization for multi-uav information collection via trajectory planning,”
Sensors , vol. 19, no. 18, p. 4032, 2019.
[5] C. Mao, J. Liu, and L. Xie, “Multi-uav aided data collection for age
minimization in wireless sensor networks,” in IEEE International Con-
ference on Wireless Communications and Signal Processing (WCSP) ,
2020, pp. 80–85.
[6] Y . Pan, Y . Yang, and W. Li, “A deep learning trained by genetic
algorithm to improve the efﬁciency of path planning for data collection
with multi-uav,” IEEE Access , vol. 9, pp. 7994–8005, 2021.
[7] Z. Liu, R. Sengupta, and A. Kurzhanskiy, “A power consumption model
for multi-rotor small unmanned aircraft systems,” in IEEE International
Conference on Unmanned Aircraft Systems (ICUAS) , 2017, pp. 310–315.
[8] Y . Zeng, J. Xu, and R. Zhang, “Energy minimization for wireless
communication with rotary-wing uav,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless
Communications , vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 2329–2345, 2019.
[9] F. Shan, J. Luo, R. Xiong, W. Wu, and J. Li, “Looking before crossing:
An optimal algorithm to minimize uav energy by speed scheduling
with a practical ﬂight energy model,” in Proceedings of the IEEE
International Conference on Computer Communications (INFOCOM) ,
2020, pp. 1758–1767.
[10] K. Helsgaun, “An effective implementation of the lin–kernighan travel-
ing salesman heuristic,” European journal of operational research , vol.
126, no. 1, pp. 106–130, 2000.
[11] S. K. Sahni, “Algorithms for scheduling independent tasks,” Journal of
the ACM (JACM) , vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 116–127, 1976.
[12] J. Diller, P. Hall, C. Schanker, K. Ung, P. Belous, P. Russell, and Q. Han,
“Iccswarm: A framework for integrated communication and control in
uav swarms,” in Proceedings of the Eighth Workshop on Micro Aerial
V ehicle Networks, Systems, and Applications (DroNet ’22) , 2022, pp.
1–6.
226
Authorized licensed use limited to: Hanoi University of Science & Technology. Downloaded on March 12,2026 at 08:21:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 