--- PAGE 1 ---

1918 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GREEN COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 5, NO. 4, DECEMBER 2021
Ofﬂine and Online UA V-Enabled Data Collection in
Time-Constrained IoT Networks
Oussama Ghdiri , Wael Jaafar ,Senior Member, IEEE , Safwan Alfattani ,Student Member, IEEE ,
Jihene Ben Abderrazak, and Halim Yanikomeroglu ,Fellow, IEEE
Abstract —Recently, unmanned aerial vehicle (UA V) technol-
ogy is endorsed to enable applications in domains such asInternet of Things (IoT), wireless sensor networks, and cellu-lar networks. Particularly, time-sensitive and energy-limited IoTnetworks located in hard-to-reach areas require efﬁcient/cost-effective data collection solution. To address this matter, weconsider a multi-UA V enabled IoT network, where several UA Vscollect data from time-constrained sensor nodes (SNs). In ourframework, SNs are managed by cluster heads (CHs), then UA Vscollect data from them. We formulate the problem of minimiz-ing system’s deployment costs and operating energy to collectdata within deadlines, subject to communication, UA Vs mission
time, and battery capacity constraints. To solve it, we propose a
two-step approach. In the ﬁrst step, an efﬁcient K-means basedmethod groups SNs and deploys CHs. Then, UA V-based ofﬂineand online data collection methods are proposed. In the ofﬂinesetting where the system’s status is known beforehand, UA V pathsare determined using near-optimal meta-heuristics. In simula-tions, the nearest-neighbor and Tabu search provided best ofﬂineperformances, conditioned on the system’s parameters. In theonline setting where no system information is available, deepreinforcement learning (DRL) based approaches are proposed.Results demonstrate the superiority of the actor-critic solution.
Index Terms —Unmanned aerial vehicle, Internet of Things,
clustering, reinforcement learning, data collection.
I. I NTRODUCTION
IN THE midst of ﬁghting the same enemy, the whole world
has faced new challenges impacting countries, commu-
nities, and individuals in countless ways. Dealing with the
unforeseen obstacles, technology is playing a pivotal role inhelping humanity react, recover, and thrive in the COVID-19
hit world. Moreover, the obligation to reduce human con-
tact as a health precaution has boosted the use of unmanned
Manuscript received January 20, 2021; revised May 20, 2021 and July
16, 2021; accepted August 8, 2021. Date of publication August 13, 2021;date of current version November 22, 2021. This work was supported in
part by Huawei Canada; in part by the National Sciences and Engineering
Research Council of Canada (NSERC); and in part by a Scholarship from KingAbdulAziz University, Saudi Arabia. (Corresponding author: Wael Jaafar.)
Oussama Ghdiri and Jihene Ben Abderrazak are with the Department of
Information Technology, ESPRIT School of Engineering, Tunis 1000, Tunisia
(e-mail: oussama.ghdiri@esprit.tn; jihene.benabderrazek@esprit.tn).
Wael Jaafar and Halim Yanikomeroglu are with the Department of Systems
and Computer Engineering, Carleton University, Ottawa, ON K1S 5B6,
Canada (e-mail: waeljaafar@sce.carleton.ca; halim@sce.carleton.ca).
Safwan Alfattani is with the School of Electrical Engineering and Computer
Science, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON K1N 6N5, Canada (e-mail:
salfa043@uottawa.ca).
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TGCN.2021.3104801aerial vehicles (UA Vs), commonly known as drones, in dif-
ferent situations. For instance, UA Vs have been deployed to
collect and deliver medical supplies and daily necessities, or
monitor social distancing [1]. The noticed UA V-based positiveexperiences is accelerating their deployment beyond the imme-
diate use in times of crisis. Yet, the enthusiasm for deploying
UA Vs applications has increased, but their potential is not fullyreached.
The pandemic has not only been the ultimate catalyst speed-
ing up the trend of UA Vs, but also accelerating the adoption ofInternet of Things (IoT) systems. Indeed, IoT is projected to
inﬁltrate almost every aspect of our lives, connecting millions
of devices and people [2]. Typically, IoT sensor nodes (SNs)
are constrained computing devices with embedded sensing
and wireless communication capabilities to connect with othernodes and transmit sensed data to a remote location for storage
or further processing [3]. They are low-cost, energy-limited,
and with short transmission range. These constraints raise sev-eral challenges, especially for critical massive machine type
communication systems. For instance, a major concern is on
how to gather data from massive IoT systems without thelatter becoming outdated. Moreover, since IoT devices can
be deployed in hard-to-reach areas and/or over moving tar-
gets, e.g., monitored groups or herds of animals, timely datacollection becomes more difﬁcult.
In this context, UA Vs can be considered as a key enabler
for from-the-sky data collection [4]. This is realizable dueto the UA Vs’ high motion ﬂexibility and maneuverability,
which permits to rapidly reach low-power IoT devices and
establish strong line-of-sight (LoS) communications [5]–[7].
Nevertheless, UA V-based data collection faces several obsta-
cles. Indeed, current UA V technology struggles with thelimited on-board energy [8], thus often requiring the deploy-
ment of multiple UA Vs to cover large-scale IoT ﬁelds and
thus, increases the data collection costs. Moreover, depend-ing on the criticality level of the IoT application linked to the
data freshness and sensitivity, both IoT network characteristics
(e.g., IoT nodes’ mobility, SNs’ clustering, and deployment ofcluster heads (CHs)), and the UA V characteristics (e.g., ﬂy-
ing speed and communication capability), have an important
impact on satisfying the targeted QoS.
Collecting data from massive and wide IoT ﬁelds using
UA Vs needs a careful design. Indeed, cost-effective data col-
lection can be achieved through: 1) IoT network deploymentoptimization and 2) efﬁcient UA V deployment and path
optimization. For the IoT network deployment, it can be
2473-2400 c/circlecopyrt2021 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Hanoi University of Science & Technology. Downloaded on March 12,2026 at 08:18:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- PAGE 2 ---

GHDIRI et al. : OFFLINE AND ONLINE UA V-ENABLED DATA COLLECTION IN TIME-CONSTRAINED IoT NETWORKS 1919
Fig. 1. UA V-based data collection in clustered IoT networks with time deadlines.
optimized through an efﬁcient SNs clustering and strate-
gic CHs placement. For UA Vs deployment, energy-efﬁcient
trajectory design is required, either for the ofﬂine scenariowhere the system’s status is available beforehand, or the
online scenario where no or limited information is avail-
able for the UA Vs’ mission. The ofﬂine scenario corre-sponds to applications for dedicated or private IoT networks,
where the IoT system architecture is static and changes
occasionally. In this case, trajectories can be preplanned.
However, when IoT sensors are mobile or their location
information is fully or partially unavailable, ofﬂine path plan-ning becomes unpractical. This corresponds to applications
such as wildlife monitoring and intelligent transportation
systems where IoT sensors may be mounted on animals andvehicles, respectively. Subsequently, it is crucial to adopt smart
and energy-efﬁcient online path planning to cope with dynamic
environments.
To tackle the aforementioned issues, we propose here novel
approaches for multi-UA V based data collection in time-
constrained IoT networks. Speciﬁcally, we propose at ﬁrsta K-means based algorithm to cluster SNs and deploy the
minimum number of CHs. Then, energy-efﬁcient ofﬂine and
online multi-UA V path planning algorithms are presented forthe optimized UA V number. The objective is to collect data
with minimum deployment cost and energy, under several
requirements, including collection deadlines, communication
conditions, UA Vs’ battery capacity and collision avoidance.
To be noted that unlike most of state-of-the-art UA V-baseddata collection works, our framework is a generalized system
that considers all of the multiple UA Vs/CHs deployment
and operational costs and constraints, and data collectionrequirements.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst work that
investigates a complete UA V-based data collection frame-work for time-constrained IoT systems, where IoT network
design and multi-UA V data collection strategies are optimized
for ofﬂine and online scenarios. Speciﬁcally, the UA V pathplanning problem is formulated as a capacitated vehicle
routing problem with time windows (CVRPTW) [9] and
proven to be NP-hard. Hence, it is solved in the ofﬂine sce-nario using several near-optimal heuristic and meta-heuristic
based algorithms, namely nearest-neighbor (NN), particle
swarm optimization (PSO), Tabu search, simulated annealing(SA), and guided local search (GLS). Moreover, we pro-
pose various reinforcement learning based algorithms for the
online scenario, including deep-Q-network (DQN), double-
DQN (DDQN), and actor-critic (AC). Since multiple UA Vs
are involved, we oriented our online solution towards a cen-tralized training-distributed execution, i.e., motion actions
are delegated to UA Vs by the learning agent, but are
penalized when one or several mission conditions are vio-lated. The key contributions of this paper are summarized
as follows.
1) Unlike the state-of-the-art studies with simpliﬁed
assumptions for UA V-enabled data collection, e.g.,
using a single UA V , impractical communication models,
unlimited energy, or uncharacterized data, this paper pro-poses a full framework for multi-UA V data collection in
a time-constrained IoT network, where real environment
constraints are taken into account, e.g., data deadlines,UA V characteristics, and realistic channel models, as
shown in Fig. 1.
2) We formulate the problem of minimizing the system’s
deployment cost and energy, through optimizing
SNs clustering, number/locations of CHs, and num-ber/trajectories of UA Vs.
3) To solve the formulated NP-hard problem, we propose a
two-step solution. First, clustering and minimum num-ber of CHs and their locations are determined through
the proposal of a novel K-means based approach. Then,
the number of collecting UA Vs and their trajectoriesare optimized for two network scenarios. In the ﬁrst
scenario, we assume a prior and full knowledge of
the system’s status, including data deadlines and CHs
Authorized licensed use limited to: Hanoi University of Science & Technology. Downloaded on March 12,2026 at 08:18:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- PAGE 3 ---

1920 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GREEN COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 5, NO. 4, DECEMBER 2021
TABLE I
COMPARISON OF RELATED WORKS FOR UAV-B ASED DATACOLLECTION IN IOTN ETWORKS .D C OLREFERS TO DATACOLLECTION ,VOL.TOVOLUME ,
DC TODEPLOYMENT COSTS (E.G., N O.OFCHS AND /ORUAV S), G2G TOGROUND -TO-GROUND CHANNEL ,AND G2A TOGROUND -TO-AIRCHANNEL
locations. Thus, UA V paths are optimized ofﬂine using
near-optimal heuristic and meta-heuristic approaches. In
the second scenario, we assume that no information
about the system is available. Hence, we propose onlinepath planning based on DRL algorithms.
4) Through simulations, we show the efﬁcacy of our
approaches in reducing the deployment costs in terms
of number of CHs and UA Vs, as well as minimizing the
mission’s energy consumption to collect the maximalamount of data.
This work is an extension of our previous work [10]. It
provides a more comprehensive review of existing UA V-basedIoT data collection solutions. Also, we extend our framework
to more realistic and dynamic scenarios, where the status of
the system is unavailable a priori. Hence, we propose novelonline reinforcement learning based methods to deal with such
conditions, and compare their performances with that of the
best ofﬂine approach.
The paper is organized as follows. Section II surveys the
related work on IoT sensors clustering, and ofﬂine and online
UA V path planning for data collection. Section III presents thesystem model. In Section IV , we formulate the optimization
problem of IoT sensors clustering and UA V path planning.
We then present our proposed IoT sensors clustering solutionin Section V and the multi-UA V path planning techniques inSection VI. We describe in Section VII the related simulation
results. Finally, we conclude the paper in Section VIII.
II. R
ELATED WORK
In this section, we present the related works that deal with
IoT sensors clustering, and ofﬂine and online UA V path plan-ning for data collection. Moreover, we present an objective
and feature-based comparison of most relevant related works
in Table I.
A. IoT Sensors Clustering
In large-scale IoT systems, collecting data from each of the
SNs has proven to be energy inefﬁcient due to the huge trafﬁc
load, increased energy consumption, and extended transmis-sion delays. To circumvent this issue, IoT clustering is advo-
cated as the most energy-efﬁcient system design approach. By
grouping SNs into small sets and deploying/designating CHs
to manage their data, the trafﬁc load towards the gateway (or
collector) is drastically reduced and reﬁned. Typically, CHsare IoT devices with higher communication ranges and pro-
cessing capability than standard sensors. They are tasked with
data collection in a speciﬁc area, where they aggregate thereceived data, remove redundancy if any, and communicate
the outcome to the gateway.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Hanoi University of Science & Technology. Downloaded on March 12,2026 at 08:18:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- PAGE 4 ---

GHDIRI et al. : OFFLINE AND ONLINE UA V-ENABLED DATA COLLECTION IN TIME-CONSTRAINED IoT NETWORKS 1921
Several works overviewed existing clustering techniques and
discussed their potential [11]–[13]. Recently, adaptive cluster-ing was proposed in [14], which takes into account the data
distribution of SNs. In [15], Shao et al. proposed a cooperative
framework with dynamic IoT clustering and power allocationusing non-orthogonal multiple access. A deep learning based
clustering method was presented in [16] where the objective
is to balance resource allocation among SNs and increase thenetwork’s life. Moreover, Hassan et al. proposed in [17] an
energy-efﬁcient clustering protocol based on the rotation of
CHs’ functions. Finally, Alfattani et al. proposed in [4] an efﬁ-
cient K-means based clustering that deploys minimum number
of CHs.
B. Ofﬂine UAV Path Planning for Data Collection
When IoT nodes have no direct links to ﬁxed/permanent
data collection gateways, UA Vs can be deployed to collect data
from SNs/CHs. Assuming that the latter’s locations are ﬁxedand known a priori, the UA Vs’ trajectories can be pre-planned.
In our previous work [4], we proposed a data collection
framework for clustered wireless sensor networks and usingone or several UA Vs. In this setting, UA V trajectories were
designed using genetic algorithm (GA) and nearest-neighbor
based solutions. The problem of minimizing the data col-lection time from time-constrained sensors was investigated
in [6], where the trajectory of a single UA V and radio resource
allocation were optimized using a sub-optimal successive con-vex approximation (SCA) based approach. Authors of [7]
optimized a single UA V trajectory aiming to minimize the
average age of information (AoI) of collected data. Moreover,
authors in [18] studied the joint optimization of SNs’ wakeup
schedule and one UA V trajectory to minimize SNs’ con-sumed energy. This work has been extended in [19] to the
multi-UA V scenario, where UA Vs paths and SNs wake-up
time allocation optimization, as well as SNs’ transmit poweroptimization, were jointly optimized through SCA and alter-
nating optimization (AO). You and Zhang used in [20] one
UA V to collect data from SNs in an urban environment.They proposed a two-step data collection approach, where
the UA V’s trajectory is optimized ofﬂine using block coor-
dinate descent (BCD), then further adjusted through linearprogramming (LP). In [21], the authors proposed an energy-
efﬁcient differential evolution (DE) based method that jointly
optimizes the UA V’s trajectory and IoT devices transmissionschedule to ensure reliable data collection and 3D device
positioning. Similarly, authors of [22] used DE to plan the
trajectory of each UA V collecting data from CHs in a speciﬁcregion. Lin et al. presented in [23] an energy-efﬁcient hier-
archical data collection scheme in a wireless sensor network
for agricultural monitoring, while the authors of [24] formu-
lated a mixed integer linear program to minimize the total
traveled distance by UA Vs when collecting data from clus-tered SNs. The optimal UA V trajectories were obtained and
demonstrated to outperform the nearest-neighbor benchmark.
Finally, Yeh et al. iteratively optimized in [25] a single UA V
trajectory, altitude, and sensor activation, in order to minimize
the mean-squared error of reconstructed SNs’ observations.C. Online UAV Path Planning for Data Collection
Most of the previous works are based on complex
optimization solutions, metaheuristic or heuristic approachesthat require a priori knowledge of the IoT network’s sta-
tus, such as SNs/CHs locations, data deadlines, etc. However,
in situations where IoT system information is not available,such as in highly mobile systems, previous path planning
approaches become inefﬁcient. In this context, reinforcement
learning (RL), in particular deep RL (DRL) [26], comes outas a new approach that provides intelligence to UA Vs in order
to make smart ﬂying decisions and accomplish missions. The
authors proposed in [27] online trajectory optimization for
sensors data collection using state-action-reward-state-action
(SARSA) and Q-learning based methods. Yi et al. proposed
in [28] a DQN based UA V trajectory that aims to minimize the
weighted sum of the IoT data’s AoI, while a similar method
is presented by Tong et al. in [29] to jointly reduce the SNs’
average AoI and packet drop rate. Moreover, Bayerlein et al.
demonstrated in [30] that their DDQN based trajectory plan-
ning is efﬁciently generalized for different scenarios, balancingbetween data collection and ﬂight time efﬁciency goals. Then,
they extended their results to multiple UA Vs in [31], where
multi-agent RL was proposed to control a swarm of cooper-ative UA Vs. In [32], the authors proposed a green dueling
DQN based data collection to minimize UA V energy con-
sumption while satisfying delay constraints of different IoTdata types. Hsu and Gau proposed in [33] a communication
platform where UA Vs deliver data in the forward path and
collect data from IoT devices in the backward path. Hybridofﬂine-online path planning was proposed, where ofﬂine local
search solution pre-plans the backward trajectory indepen-
dently from other UA Vs, and the online Q-learning solution
guarantees collision-free ﬂying. In [34], the authors proposed
two solutions to collect data from clustered backscatter SNsin the shortest total ﬂight time of rechargeable UA Vs. The
ﬁrst, single-agent deep option learning (SADOL), designs
each UA V trajectory given deterministic UA V ﬂying regionsboundaries, while the second, called multi-agent deep option
learning (MADOL), enables cooperation among UA Vs to learn
from ambiguous ﬂying regions and coordinate their trajecto-ries. Finally, Bouhamed et al. proposed in [35] autonomous
UA V-based data collection for delay-tolerant wireless sen-
sor networks. The authors used deep deterministic gradientdecent (DDPG) to determine the best obstacle-free path and
Q-learning for SNs’ visits ordering.
III. S
YSTEM MODEL
In this section, we present the considered network and chan-
nel models, the UA V-enabled data collection model, and theUA V energy model. All used symbols are summarized in
Table II.
A. Network and Channel Models
We consider an IoT sensor network consisting of a set
M={1,..., M}of SNs, randomly located in a large area
and constantly collecting time-sensitive data. We assume that
Authorized licensed use limited to: Hanoi University of Science & Technology. Downloaded on March 12,2026 at 08:18:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- PAGE 5 ---

1922 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GREEN COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 5, NO. 4, DECEMBER 2021
TABLE II
NOTATIONS
SNs are heterogeneous, i.e., sensed data by SNs are of differ-
ent kind, and have different importance in time. Indeed, some
data are more critical and need to be collected faster than otherless-critical ones. Due to the limited energy/communication
capability of typical IoT sensors, we assume that a set of
K={1,..., K}cluster heads (CHs) can be deployed to col-
lect, aggregate, and transmit sensed data to the collector. As
shown in Fig. 1, collection of data is operated by multipleUA Vs, which ﬂy and hover above or close to CHs for a
sufﬁcient time to collect the aggregated data.
Each sensor transmits its sensed data to its associated CH
using power P
SN, while a CH communicates with the collect-
ing UA V using power PCH>PSN. Assuming that IoT sensors
communicate with their associated CH using orthogonal chan-nels, the received signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) at CH cfor the
signal transmitted by SN s, denoted γ
sc, can be written as
γsc=PSNd−αsc
σ2,∀s∈M,∀c∈K, (1)
where dsc=||qs−qc||is the distance between IoT sensor
sand CH c,qi=[xi,yi,zi]is the 3D location of node i
(i=sorc),αis the path loss exponent, and σ2is the noise
power.1This communication link is considered successful if
γsc≥γth, whereγthis a selected SNR threshold. Hence,
maximum communication range for SN sassociated with CH
cis deﬁned as [4], [36]
dsc≤dth=/parenleftbiggPSN
σ2γth/parenrightbigg1/α
,∀s∈A c,c∈K, (2)
1Although different SN-CH channel models can be adopted, we have cho-
sen here the popular log-distance channel model for its simplicity in deﬁning
the communication range between SNs and CHs [36], [37].whereAcis the set of SNs associated with CH c.G i v e n( 2 ) ,
the CHs are deployed to collect data from SNs and send it to
UAVs. Let U={1,..., U}be the set of available UA Vs. For
the sake of simplicity, we assume that a UA V ﬂies at a ﬁxed
altitude Hrespecting authority regulations and safety consid-
erations. Also, UA Vs are equipped with sensors that allow
obstacle avoidance at a certain safety distance, denoted dsafe,
when they ﬂy at maximum speed vmax.
When UA V uhovers to receive data from CH c, the air-to-
ground channel between them can be expressed using the path
loss model given by [38]
lcu=/braceleftbigg
20log(4πfc/V)+20log( dcu)+ηLoS,LoS,
20log(4πfc/V)+20log( dcu)+ηNLoS,NLoS,
(3)
where dcuis the distance between UA V uand CH c,fc
is the carrier frequency, Vis the speed of light, and ηm
(m∈{LoS,NLoS}) is the excessive path-loss coefﬁcient.
Using the Friis formula, the received power at UA V ufrom
CHc, denoted Pcu, is expressed by
Pcu=PCH−lcu,∀c∈K u,∀u∈U, (4)
where PCHis the transmit power of a CH. To determine if
a link is in LoS or NLoS, locations, heights, and number
of buildings are required. Typically, locations and heights of
buildings follow a Poisson point process (PPP) and a Rayleighdistribution, respectively. The density parameter of PPP is
deﬁned as μ=μ
1μ2, whereμ1is the ratio of geographic area
covered by buildings to total area, μ2is the average number of
buildings/km2, and the buildings’ heights follow the Rayleigh
distribution with scale parameter ρ, such that the probability
Authorized licensed use limited to: Hanoi University of Science & Technology. Downloaded on March 12,2026 at 08:18:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- PAGE 6 ---

GHDIRI et al. : OFFLINE AND ONLINE UA V-ENABLED DATA COLLECTION IN TIME-CONSTRAINED IoT NETWORKS 1923
density function p(hb)=hb
ρ2e−hb/2ρ2, where hbis the build-
ing’s height (in m). A LoS link between UA V uand CH cis
blocked if it exists a building bbetween them such that the
following inequality holds [39]:
hb
d2D
cb>H
d2Dcu⇔tan(θ)>tan(θ/prime), (5)
where d2Dcuandd2D
cbare the projected 2D distances into the
ground between UA V uand CH cand between building band
CHc, respectively, whereas θandθ/primeare the elevation angles
from the UA V and building top perspectives, characterized by
tan(θ)=d2D
cu
Handtan(θ/prime)=d2D
cb
hb.
B. UAV Data Collection Model
We assume that the mission time, i.e., the maximum time for
UA Vs to collect data from CHs and return to their dockstation,
isTFand is divided into Ntime slots (TSs). Thus, TSs are
equal and are of length δ=TF
N. We deﬁne the 3D location
of UA V uin time slot tasqtu=[xtu,ytu,H]. Since the UA V’s
speed is limited by vmax, its traveled distance in one TS is
constrained by
/vextenddouble/vextenddouble/vextenddoubleqt+1
u−qt
u/vextenddouble/vextenddouble/vextenddouble=/radicalbigg
/parenleftBig
xt+1u−xtu/parenrightBig2
+/parenleftBig
yt+1u−ytu/parenrightBig2
≤vmaxδ.
(6)
In our system, each CH cuploads its data to its associated
UAV uat rate Rcuin bits/second (bps), determined using the
Shannon equation as follows:
Rcu=Wlog2(1+γcu),∀c∈K u,∀u∈U, (7)
where Wis the total bandwidth of the channel and γcu=Pcu
σ2
is the SNR. Accordingly, the required number of TSs to upload
one packet to the UA V can be expressed by
T1,cu=/ceilingleftbiggSp
Rcuδ/ceilingrightbigg
,∀c∈K u,∀u∈U, (8)
where Spis the size of the packet in bits and ⌈·⌉is the ceiling
function. Given Qcdata packets to be transmitted by CH c,
then the required data collection time (in TSs) by UA V uis
Tcu=QcT1,cu,∀c∈K u,∀u∈U. (9)
Due to the different priorities of collected data at each CH, we
deﬁne by Td,cthe time deadline of data stored in CH c, i.e.,
if not totally collected within this deadline, the data present
in the CH becomes outdated and is dropped.2Hence, data
collection has to respect the following constraint, assuming
that all packets in one CH are collected by a single UA V:
φu(c)/summationdisplay
m=1/bracketleftbig
Tmu+Tf,u(m−1,m)/bracketrightbig
≤Td,c,∀c∈K u,(10)
whereφu(c)designates the rank (i.e., index) of CH cinKu,
Tmuis the data collection time of the mthranked CH in
Ku, and Tf,u(m−1,m)is the ﬂight time (in TSs) from the
2Typically, this deadline is determined by the most critical sensed data. It
sets our system to stringent conditions, where all data of a CH are considered
critical.hovering location to collect data from the (m−1)thranked CH
to that associated to the mthranked CH in Ku, with m=0
being the dockstation. The ﬂight time of UA V ubetween two
locations qu,iandqu,i/prime, where iandi/primeare two CHs ranks in
the UA V path, can be calculated as follows:
Tf,u(i,i/prime)=/vextenddouble/vextenddoublequ,i/prime−qu,i/vextenddouble/vextenddouble
vuδ, (11)
where vu≤vmax is the ﬂying speed of the UA V (in m/sec).
C. UAV Energy Model
The UA V is energy-constrained due to limited on-board
battery. The battery lifetime depends on several factors, e.g.,
UA V’s energy source, type, weight, speed, etc. Typically, the
UA V’s consumption consists of the propulsion energy andthe communication energy. Without loss of generality, com-
munication energy is several orders of magnitude smaller
than propulsion energy, thus neglected here. For the sake ofsimplicity, we ignore also the energy consumption effect of
UA V acceleration or deceleration. This assumption is rea-
sonable when UA V manoeuvring time is small compared
to the total operation time [40]. The extension to a more
general power consumption model is not straight-forward,thus left as a future work. For the propulsion energy, we
adopt the propulsion-power model for rotary-wing UA Vs as
follows [40]:
P
prop,u(vu)=ζI/parenleftBigg/radicalBigg
1+v4u
4v4
0−v2u
2v2
0/parenrightBigg1/2
+ζB/parenleftBigg
1+3v2u
U2
tip/parenrightBigg
+1
2d0ψrAv3
u,(12)
whereζBandζIare the blade proﬁle power and induced
power, respectively. Utipis the tip speed of the rotor blade,
v0is the mean rotor induced velocity, ψis the air density, d0
is the fuselage drag ratio, ris the rotor solidity, and Adenotes
the rotor disc area. Consumed power at hovering is obtained
for speed vu=0, and written as
Phov,u=Pprop,u(vu=0 )=ζB+ζI. (13)
Using (12)–(13), the consumed energy of UA V uduring a time
period Tcan be given by
Eu(v,T)=/braceleftbiggPprop,u(v)×T,ifv>0
Phov,u×T,ifv=0.(14)
Hence, the related battery status at TS t, denoted Su(t), can
be expressed by
Su(t)=Su(t−1)−Eu(v,δ),∀t>1, (15)
where Su(t−1)is the battery’s status at the end of TS ( t−1),
andSu(0)is the initial battery capacity. The latter is expressed
asSu(0) = Sini+Smin, where Siniis the battery capacity ded-
icated for the mission, while Sminis a safety capacity, reserved
for emergency pull back to the dockstation. Consequently, we
have Su(t)∈[Smin,Su(0)].
Authorized licensed use limited to: Hanoi University of Science & Technology. Downloaded on March 12,2026 at 08:18:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- PAGE 7 ---

1924 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GREEN COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 5, NO. 4, DECEMBER 2021
IV . P ROBLEM FORMULATION
In this section, we formulate our optimization problem aim-
ing to minimize an utility function of data collection, whichtakes into account CHs deployment costs and UA Vs’ energy
consumption. Let K
u=|Ku|be the cardinality of the set Ku,
∀u∈U. Then, using (14), the consumed energy by UA V u
during the mission is given by
Eu(Ku)=Ku+1/summationdisplay
m=1[Eu(0,Tmuδ)
+Eu/parenleftbig
vu,Tf,u(m−1,m)δ/parenrightbig/bracketrightbig
,(16)
where Tf,u(Ku,Ku+1)=/bardblqu,Ku−q0/bardbl/vuδandq0is the
initial location of all UA Vs, i.e., dockstation. Therefore, the
optimization problem can be formulated as:
min
K,L,{Ac}c∈K
U,{Ku,Lu}u∈U/parenleftBigg
ξK+U/summationdisplay
u=1Eu(Ku)/parenrightBigg
(P1)
s.t.dsc≤dth,∀s∈A c,∀c∈K, (P1.a)
|Ac|≤F,∀c∈K, (P1.b)
Su(t)≥Smin,∀u∈U,∀1≤t≤Tu,∀u∈U,
(P1.c)
φu(c)/summationdisplay
m=0/parenleftbig
Tmu+Tf,u(m−1,m)/parenrightbig
≤Td,c, (P1.d)
/vextenddouble/vextenddoubleqt
u−qt
u/prime/vextenddouble/vextenddouble≥dsafe,∀t≥1,∀(u,u/prime)∈U2,u/negationslash=u/prime,
(P1.e)/vextenddouble/vextenddouble/vextenddoubleqt+1
u−qt
u/vextenddouble/vextenddouble/vextenddouble≤v
maxδ,∀1≤t≤Tu,∀u∈U,(P1.f)
whereξ>0is a unitary cost associated with the number of
deployed CHs, |Ac|is the cardinality of the set Ac,Tu≤
Nis the effective mission completion time for UA V u(in
TSs),L={qc}c∈Kis the set of selected locations for CHs,
andLu={qu,i}i∈K uis the set of ordered UA V hovering
locations to collect data from the associated CHs.
Constraint (P1.a) ensures that CH cis within the communi-
cation range of its associated SNs, whereas (P1.b) guarantees
fairness in associating SNs with CHs, where Fis the maxi-
mum number of SNs associated with one CH. Equation (P1.c)
makes sure that enough energy is available in the battery to
complete the mission at any TS t, while (P1.d) satisﬁes the
time deadline condition when a UA V collects data from CHs.
Also, (P1.e) ensures that no collisions between UA Vs occur,
and ﬁnally, (P1.f) limits the ﬂying distance for vmax.
The formulated problem is NP-hard. Indeed, in the special
case of already deployed CHs, (P1) is equivalent to determin-
ing the best paths for UA Vs, while respecting the battery and
time deadlines conditions. The latter can be seen as the capac-
itated vehicle routing problem with time windows [9]. TheCVRPTW can be described as selecting the paths of a number
of vehicles aiming to serve a group of customers within given
time windows. Each vehicle has a limited capacity, which isused to depart from a depot point, serve a number of cus-
tomers along its path, then return to the same depot point.The objective of the CVRPTW is to minimize the total trans-
port costs. Logically, the vehicles, customers, and transportcosts, can be assimilated by the UA Vs, CHs, and energy con-
sumption, respectively. Since the CVRPTW is known to be
NP-hard [9], then by restriction, problem (P1) is also NP-hard.
In (P1), we notice that the objective function can be
rewritten as follows:
min
K,L,{Ac}c∈K/parenleftBigg
ξK+m i n
U,{Ku,Lu}u∈UU/summationdisplay
u=1Eu(Ku)/parenrightBigg
,(17)
where two sub-objectives can be distinguished: The ﬁrst
minimizes the deployment cost of CHs, while the sec-
ond reduces data collection energy. Moreover, constraints
(P1.a)-(P1.b) are only related to optimization variables K,L
and{Ac}c∈K, while (P1.c)-(P1.f) relate also to Uand
{Ku,Lu}u∈U. Accordingly, and following the divide-and-
conquer method [41], [42], (P1) can be divided into twocascaded problems as follows.
1) First, we formulate the IoT sensors clustering and CHs
placement problem aiming to minimize the number ofdeployed CHs.
2) Then, the UA Vs’ path planning problem can be for-
mulated, where the objective is to minimize energy
consumption for data collection.
We expect the outcome of the cascaded problem to be equiv-alent to that of (P1) since minimizing at ﬁrst the CHs’
deployment costs implies inevitably a signiﬁcant reduction
in data collection energy. Subsequently, we solve these twosub-problems as follows.
V. I
OTS ENSORS CLUSTERING SOLUTION
Typically, IoT sensors are deployed in large areas in order
to sense, process, and communicate relevant data for some
applications. Due to their limited battery capacities, IoT sen-
sors need to carefully use their energy, while prolonging thelife of collected data as much as possible. To do so, IoT sen-
sors can be grouped into disjoint and non-overlapping clusters
to reduce the amount of used energy. SNs scan the surroundingenvironment and transmit sensed data to CHs, which aggregate
and transmit obtained information to the UA Vs [43].
Several state-of-the-art clustering techniques exist, e.g.,
K-means [44], density-based spatial clustering, and hierarchical
agglomerative clustering (HAC) [45]. Nevertheless, due to the
low-complexity and high scalability of K-means, we focus hereon its customization, aiming to group SNs and deploy minimal
number of CHs. Thus, the clustering problem can be written as
min
K,L,
{Ac}c∈KK/summationdisplay
c=1M/summationdisplay
s=1ascd2
sc (P2)
s.t.dsc≤dth,∀s∈A c,∀c∈K, (P2.a)
|Ac|≤F,∀c∈K, (P2.b)
where asc∈{0,1}is a binary variable indicating whether SN sis
associated with CH cor not,∀s∈A c. Conventionally, K-means
clustering requires a predeﬁned number of CHs. Hence, in [4],the authors proposed it to solve (P2) without any constraint,
then reexecuted it iteratively until (P2.a) is met. Such method
Authorized licensed use limited to: Hanoi University of Science & Technology. Downloaded on March 12,2026 at 08:18:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- PAGE 8 ---

GHDIRI et al. : OFFLINE AND ONLINE UA V-ENABLED DATA COLLECTION IN TIME-CONSTRAINED IoT NETWORKS 1925
Algorithm 1 IoT Sensors Clustering Algorithm
1:Input:M,{qs}s∈M,a n d max it%max itis the max. number
of CHs
2:Output: OptimalK,L,a n d{Ac}c∈K
3:Setk=(M÷F)%Fis the max. number of SNs in a cluster
4:forktomax itdo
5: SetLold={},s e tLrandomly, and set Ac=∅,∀c=
1,..., k
6: Seterror =dist(L,Lold)%Convergence parameter
7: while error/negationslash=0 do
8: fors∈M do
9: Calculate dsc,∀c=1,..., k
10: Find c0= arg(min( dsc))
11: ifdsc0≤dth&|Ac0∪{s}| ≤ Fthen
12: Ac0=Ac0∪{s}
13: else
14: Ak+1=Ak+1∪{s}
15: end if
16: end for
17: SetLold=L
18: Calculate Las the mean location of the associated SNs
inAc
19: Calculate error =dist(L,Lold)
20: end while
21: ifAk+1=∅then
22: K={1,..., k}
23: Break
24: end if
25:end for
26:while max( dsc)<dth,∀s∈A cdo
27: GetLcloser to the dockstation
28:end while
is time consuming and inaccurate, as clustering performance
may vary with algorithm initialization. Therefore, we propose
here to improve it by integrating constraints (P2.a)–(P2.b) into
the clustering process. The proposed approach, presented inAlgorithm 1, is described as follows. First, locations of KCHs
are randomly initialized. Then, each SN is assigned to the
closest CH with respect to (P2.a)–(P2.b). Next, the locations of
CHs are updated by calculating the resulting mean location of
associated SNs for each CH. This procedure is repeated untilconvergence, i.e., the calculated locations remain unchanged.
Since we aim to deploy the minimal number of CHs, we execute
the aforementioned steps for an increasing number of CHs untila solution to (P2) is obtained, i.e., Kis determined. Although
the calculated CHs locations are an adequate solution for (P2),
this may not be the case for the main problem (P1). In thiscontext, we propose to improve the locations of CHs by making
them closer to the dockstation. Indeed, CH chas a mobility
margin if its furthest associated SN, denoted s
0, respects (P2.a)
loosely, i.e., ds0c<dth. Hence, making the CHs closer to
the dockstation would increase the probability to respect data
collection deadlines, shorten the mission time, and improve theenergy consumption of UA Vs. This procedure is implemented
in lines 26-27 of Algorithm 1.
VI. M
ULTI -UA V P ATH PLANNING SOLUTIONS
A. Ofﬂine Path Planning
GivenK,L, andAc,∀c∈K , the trajectory planning
problem can be formulated asmin
U,
{Lu,Ku}u∈UU/summationdisplay
u=1Eu(Ku) (P3)
s.t.Su(t)≥Smin,∀u∈U,∀1≤t≤Tu,∀u∈U,
(P3.a)
φu(c)/summationdisplay
m=0/parenleftbig
Tmu+Tf,u(m−1,m)/parenrightbig
≤Td,c, (P3.b)
/vextenddouble/vextenddoubleqt
u−qt
u/prime/vextenddouble/vextenddouble≥dsafe,∀t≥1,∀(u,u/prime)∈U2,u/negationslash=u/prime,
(P3.c)/vextenddouble/vextenddouble/vextenddoubleqt+1
u−qt
u/vextenddouble/vextenddouble/vextenddouble≤v
maxδ,∀1≤t≤Tu,∀u∈U.
(P3.d)
In order to solve it, we model our system as a graph,
described as follows. Let G=(D,E)be a complete graph,
whereD={0,1,..., K}is a set of vertices (nodes) repre-
senting the dockstation (node 0) and KCHs, and Eis the
set of directed edges connecting the nodes. A directed edge
from node ito node j, denoted eij, represents the combination
of the UA V’s ﬂying operation from itojand the hover-
ing operation at j. A cost associated to the edge eij, called
χu(eij)= Eu(vu,μ1(eij)) + Eu(0,μ2(eij)), is expressed
as the sum of the UA V’s ﬂying and hovering energy, where
μ1(eij)=Tf,u(i,j)δandμ2(eij)=Tjuδ,∀u∈U, respec-
tively.3Moreover, the time deadlines at CHs are represented
in the graph by a time window ωc=[oc,vc], where ocand
vcare the minimum and maximum instants for data collec-
tion, for each node c∈D. This time window deﬁnes when
data collection at node ccan begin and end. Finally, trajec-
tory of UA V uinGcan be deﬁned by Ku, where each element
ofKuis an ordered node to visit. Accordingly, (P3) can be
reformulated as problem (P4) detailed below:
min
U,{Ku,Lu}u∈U/summationdisplay
u∈U/summationdisplay
i∈D/summationdisplay
j∈Dχu/parenleftbig
eij/parenrightbig
bu,ij (P4)
s.t.U/summationdisplay
u=1/summationdisplay
i∈Dbu,ij≤1,∀j∈D (P4.a)
/summationdisplay
j∈Dbu,0j=/summationdisplay
i∈Dbu,i0=1,∀u∈U (P4.b)
oc≤j−1/summationdisplay
i=1μ1/parenleftBig
ei(i+1)/parenrightBig
+μ2/parenleftBig
ei(i+1)/parenrightBig
≤vc,j∈K u
(P4.c)/summationdisplay
i∈D/summationdisplay
j∈Dχu/parenleftbig
eij/parenrightbig
bu,ij≤Su(0)−Smin,∀u∈U,
(P4.d)
bu,ij∈{0,1}, (P4.e)
where bu,ijis the binary variable indicating the selection of the
edge i−jwithin UA V u’s trajectory. Constraint (P4.a) ensures
that each CH is visited at most once by exactly one UA V .
Equation (P4.b) guarantees that each UA V departs and returns
3This is valid assuming that all UA Vs are of the same type, i.e., having the
same mechanical and communication characteristics.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Hanoi University of Science & Technology. Downloaded on March 12,2026 at 08:18:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- PAGE 9 ---

1926 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GREEN COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 5, NO. 4, DECEMBER 2021
to the dockstation. Condition (P4.c) emphasizes that the data
collection time has to be within the deﬁned time window.Finally, (P4.d) guarantees that the consumed energy by any
UA V respects the battery capacity. Subsequently, problem (P4)
can be solved using any of the available CVRPTW heuristicor meta-heuristic approaches, such as gradient descent, SA,
Tabu search, GLS, etc. [46]–[48].
4
B. Online Path Planning: Reinforcement-Learning BasedApproaches
In contrast to ofﬂine approaches, online algorithms are com-
monly used when inputs or data are arriving in a sequentialorder and without being fully available. In our context, DRL-
based algorithms can be used for path planning. To do so,
we start by reformulating the optimization problem (19) as a
Markov Decision Process (MDP).
An MDP is a discrete-time stochastic control process used
for a variety of optimization problems, where the outcome
is partially random and under the control of a decision
maker [50]. The state of the process in time slot tis denoted
s
tand the decision maker may choose any action atinA(st),
which is the set of available actions in state st. Subsequently,
the system transits to a new state s/primeand provides the reward
Rat(st,s/prime). State s/primedepends on the current state stand the
taken action. The transition probability to state s/primeis given
by the function Pat(st,s/prime). Speciﬁcally, the MDP’s state
transition in our system is a 5-tuple (S,A,P,R,γ)deﬁned as:
•S={st}is a set of states st={qt
1,..., qt
U,Gt}.T h e
latter is composed of the UA Vs’ locations qtuand the
percentage of visited CHs within the area, deﬁned as
Gt=Kt
K, where Ktis the number of visited of CHs
in time slot t.
•A={at}is the set of actions, where at={at
1...., at
U}
is the set of actions taken by the UA Vs, with atu∈
{0...7}representing cardinal and inter-cardinal direc-
tions, i.e., 0 (North), 1 (South), 2 (East), 3 (West),
4 (Northeast), 5 (Northwest), 6 (Southeast), and 7(Southwest). For the sake of simplicity, we assume that
when an action is selected, all UA Vs move at the same
speed v
u=vmax, such that (P1.f) is always satisﬁed.
•P={Pat(st,s/prime)}is the set of transition probabilities.
•Ris the immediate reward value, obtained when action
atis taken at state st. Its expression is related to
the objective function and constraints deﬁned in (19).
Speciﬁcally, the reward function is designed to maximizecollected data within the deadlines, with minimum energy
consumption, and while accounting for the impact of con-
straints (P3.b)–(P3.d). Hence, the reward function of UA Vuin TS tof episode eis deﬁned as
R
e,u
at/parenleftbig
st,s/prime/parenrightbig
=fu,e
1,t(c)−fu,e
2,t(c), (18)
4For the sake of simplicity and low-complexity, we opted here for
trajectory-based metaheursitic solutions, which are expected to yield near-
optimal solutions. Different heuristics, such as NN, and population-basedmetaheuristics, such as PSO and ACO, can also be used [46], [49]. Finally,the investigation of iterative solutions, such as based on BCD, is left as a
future work.where fe
1,tandfe
2,tare functions describing the reward
and penalty in TS tof episode efor collecting data
from CH cwithin the UA V’s communication range,
respectively. given by
fu,e
1,t(c)=/braceleftbiggΦ1−Eu(0,Tcu),ift≤Td,c−Tcu,
Φ2, ift>Td,c−Tcu,
(19)
and
fu,e
2,t(c)=⎧
⎨
⎩Eu(vmax,δ),ifqtu/∈S,
Eu(vmax,δ)+Ψ 1,ifqtu∈S
or∃u/prime∈U\ { u},/vextenddouble/vextenddoubleqtu−qt
u/prime/vextenddouble/vextenddouble<dsafe.(20)
fu,e
1,t(c)offers a reward Φ1to the RL agent if UA V u
collects data from CH cbefore expiration of the deadline
Td,c, but is reduced by the energy consumption due to
hovering for data collection. Otherwise, it gives a penaltyΦ
2<0for late arrival at the CH. Also, fu,e
2,t(c)imposes
an energy penalty due to UA V motion, and an extra
penaltyΨ1>0to discourage it from visiting already
served CHs or to breach the safe ﬂying condition. Then,
the ﬁnal reward Reis expressed by
Re=U/summationdisplay
u=1Nu/summationdisplay
t=1Ru,e
at, (21)
where Nudenotes the total number of time slots in one
episode for UA V u, calculated as the minimum to reach
the lowest battery level Smin and the one to achieve
Gt=1. To make sure that constraint (P3.a) is always
satisﬁed, we update the residual battery capacity Su(t)
at each time slot tof an episode e. Then, when Su(t)
becomes equal to Sminand the UA V has not yet returned
to the dockstation, it stops making new motion actions
and ﬂies straight back to the dockstation using the leftbattery capacity S
min.
•γ∈[0,1]is the discount factor that favors the present
reward over the future ones.
Our objective is to train a policy π∗(s)that maximizes the
discounted cumulative reward Rt0=/summationtext∞
t=t0γt−t0Re. Hence,
we propose novel DRL based approaches where a single multi-task agent that has no knowledge about the CHs’ locations
and their data deadlines, attempts to determine the sequen-
tial actions to collect the maximum amount of data using
multiple UA Vs. Speciﬁcally, we adopt DQN, DDQN, and AC
based algorithms. The motivation behind using these learningalgorithms lies in their suitability to use with discrete action
spaces.
1) DQN: Initially, Q-learning designs a value function Q
∗
that matches every state to the most adequate action. Hence, a
policyπ∗(s)can be constructed to maximize the reward, i.e.,
π∗(s) = argmax aQ∗(s,a). However, Q∗cannot be easily
deﬁned. Since neural networks are universal function approxi-
mators, they can be used to create and train a function Qπ
DQN
to resemble Q∗. The latter, when associated with policy π,
obeys the Bellman equation [26]:
Q=Re
at/parenleftbig
st,s/prime/parenrightbig
+γQπ
DQN/parenleftbig
s/prime,π(s/prime)/parenrightbig
. (22)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Hanoi University of Science & Technology. Downloaded on March 12,2026 at 08:18:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- PAGE 10 ---

GHDIRI et al. : OFFLINE AND ONLINE UA V-ENABLED DATA COLLECTION IN TIME-CONSTRAINED IoT NETWORKS 1927
TABLE III
SIMULATION PARAMETERS
Algorithm 2 Actor-Critic Algorithm
1:Input: The current state st
2:Output: The best action at
3:Initialize st,θ,w; sample at∼πθ(s,a)
4:fore=1...Epdo %Epmaximal number of episodes
5: fort=1...Ndo
6: Sample reward rt∼Re
at(st,s/prime)and next state s/prime∼
Pat(st,s/prime)
7: Sample the next action a/prime∼πθ(s/prime,a/prime)
8: Update parameters θ←θ+αθQw(s,a)∇θln(πθ(s,a))
9: Compute δt=rt+γQw(s/prime,a/prime)−Q w(s,a)
10: Update w←w+αwδt∇wQw(s,a)
11: Update a←a/primeands←s/prime
12: end for
13:end for
2) DDQN: The DQN approach uses the maximization oper-
ator for the selection and evaluation of actions. In contrast,
DDQN adopts two networks, where the ﬁrst selects the action
while the second evaluates it [51]. Consequently, two valuefunctions are learned such that for each update, one set of
neural network weights is used to determine the greedy pol-
icy, while the second set evaluates the value of the associatedpolicy. Thus, the best policy is determined as π
DDQN(st)=
argmax aQ∗(st+1,a), whereas the Q-function is updated by
Qπ
DDQN=Re
at+1/parenleftBig
st+1,s/prime/parenrightBig
+γQ/parenleftBig
st+1,πDDQN(st)/parenrightBig
.
(23)
For enhanced efﬁciency, we use the Q-network with experi-
ence replay, which stores the episode steps in memory foroff-policy learning.
3) AC: Unlike Q-learning based methods, actor-critic splits
the model into two components to leverage the strengths ofboth value-based and policy-based techniques [52]. On one
hand, the actor takes as input the state and outputs the best
action. It essentially controls how the agent behaves by learn-
ing the optimal policy (policy-based). On the other hand,
the critic evaluates the action by computing the value func-tion (value-based). These two models participate in a game
to improve their own roles through time. Speciﬁcally, the
critic updates the value function parameters, denoted w, and,
depending on the algorithm, it could be action-value Q
w(s,a)
or state-value Vw(s). In the meantime, the actor updates the
Fig. 2. Avg. no. of clusters vs. dth.
neural network parameters θfor the policy πθ(s,a)in the
direction suggested by the critic. The actor-critic operation is
detailed in Algorithm 2, where ∇θln(πθ(s,a))is the policy
gradient, δtis the temporal difference (TD) error correction,
and∇wQw(s,a)is the update of the Q-function parameters.
VII. S IMULATION RESULTS
In this section, we evaluate the performance of the proposed
solutions for IoT sensors clustering and UA V path planning.Unless speciﬁed otherwise, we assume M=2000 SNs ran-
domly and uniformly distributed within a geographical area of
5×5k m
2. The remaining simulation parameters are presented
in Table III.
A. IoT Sensors Clustering Results
Fig. 2 presents the clustering performance of several algo-
rithms, expressed by the average number of clusters as a
function of communication range, dth(averaging over 100 sce-
narios of SNs). We consider 3 algorithms, namely proposed
Algorithm 1, K-means-based clustering in [4] (K-meansAlgorithm [4]), and HAC-based clustering (HAC [45]). As
d
thincreases, a smaller number of CHs is needed, since the
latter can be reached by a higher number of SNs. Moreover,Algorithm 1 achieves the best clustering performance. Indeed,
unlike other algorithms, Algorithm 1 is capable of adjusting
Authorized licensed use limited to: Hanoi University of Science & Technology. Downloaded on March 12,2026 at 08:18:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- PAGE 11 ---

1928 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GREEN COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 5, NO. 4, DECEMBER 2021
Fig. 3. Clustering/UA V trajectories.
Fig. 4. Energy vs. batt. cap.
the clusters to constraints (P2.a)–(P2.b) on-the-ﬂy, i.e., while
processing the SNs.
In Fig. 3, we depict a scenario where Algorithm 1 is used
to group 1800 SNs into 18 clusters, from which data is col-
lected using 3 UA Vs. We distinguish two variations, namely
Algorithm 1 as is, and “Algorithm 1 (Short)” where the algo-rithm lines 26–27 are omitted, i.e., CHs’ locations are not
made closer to the dockstation. Each colored dashed bound-
ary around a CH delimits the area of SNs associated withthe latter. Putting the CHs closer to the dockstation does not
alter the association with SNs since (P1.a) is still satisﬁed.
Obviously, shorter CH-dockstation distances would result inmore energy-efﬁcient UA V-based data collection since trajec-
tories would become shorter. An example of UA V trajectories
is illustrated in Fig. 3 using colored solid lines.
B. Ofﬂine Path Planning Results
We assume here 2000 SNs grouped using Algorithm 1 into
49 clusters. Figs. 4–5 compare the consumed energy (in kilo-joule, kJ), number of visited CHs, and number of deployed
UA Vs performances, as functions of the battery capacity, for
different ofﬂine trajectory design approaches, namely NN,PSO, Tabu search, SA, and GLS. Performances are almost
similar, with preference for NN when battery capacity is low
Fig. 5. No. CHs/UA Vs vs. batt. cap.
Fig. 6. Energy vs. deadline.
(below 2250 mAh), and for Tabu search when battery capacityis higher. Indeed, since all data in CHs have the same time
deadline, and given the limited battery capacity, NN is ableto reach more CHs since it follows a greedy distance-based
mechanism and it deploys a higher number of UA Vs, whereas
Tabu search is the most energy-efﬁcient approach (with SA ansGLS)
5to collect data from all CHs, given sufﬁcient battery
capacity. As the battery capacity increases (above 2250 mAh),
the performance saturates, thus guaranteeing data collectionfrom all CHs. Finally, the optimal battery capacity of 2250
mAh is provided by Tabu, where minimum energy ( =159 kJ)
and number of UA Vs ( =12) are achieved.
In Figs. 6–7, Tabu algorithm performances are depicted as
functions of the time deadline, for combinations of IoT sen-
sors clustering methods and UA V hovering techniques, namely,
a combination of Algorithm 1 and UA Vs hovering directly
above the CHs for data collection, denoted by “Algorithm 1 +
HA”, a combination of “Algorithm 1 (Short)” and HA, called
“Algorithm 1 (Short) +HA”, and ﬁnally a combination of
Algorithm 1 and UA Vs hovering within a coverage range fromthe CHs, is designated as “Algorithm 1 +HR”. As the deadline
increases, the consumed energy reaches a peak then decreases.
5Tabu search is preferred over SA and GLS since it presented the shortest
execution time.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Hanoi University of Science & Technology. Downloaded on March 12,2026 at 08:18:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- PAGE 12 ---

GHDIRI et al. : OFFLINE AND ONLINE UA V-ENABLED DATA COLLECTION IN TIME-CONSTRAINED IoT NETWORKS 1929
Fig. 7. No. CHs/UA Vs vs. deadline.
Fig. 8. Impact of the environment type ( Su(0) = 3500 mAh, Td,c=
140 sec).
Below this peak, the deadline is very small such that it prevents
collecting data from all CHs as the latter will be outdated,
hence, a small number of UA Vs is deployed, which consumes
low energy due to short trajectories. In contrast, beyond thepeak point, the deadline is long enough to deploy few UA Vs
that visit all CHs. The peak point corresponds to the critical
deadline for which the maximum number of UA Vs is deployedto collect data from the CHs. “Algorithm 1 +HR” has the
best energy consumption for deadlines above 100 sec while
visiting and deploying similar numbers of CHs and UA Vs as“Algorithm 1 +HA”. Indeed, “Algorithm 1 +HR” compen-
sates for the prolonged data collection time and energy (due to
longer distances to CHs) by shorter ﬂying time and less energyconsumption. For deadlines below 100 sec, “Algorithm 1 +
HA” and “Algorithm 1 +HR” perform similarly in terms of
energy and number of visited CHs, since hovering exactlyabove CHs improves the data transmission and thus respects
the deadlines. Finally, “Algorithm 1 (Short) +HA” presents
the worst performance as it spends more energy to reach CHs
at distant locations, or in contrast, abandon them due to their
data becoming outdated.
Fig. 8 investigates the impact of the environ-
ment type on the Tabu approach, given the same
SNs’ design of Figs. 4–5. The environment param-eters for (3)–(4) are given as follows: 1) suburban
(μ
1,μ2,ρ,μ LoS,μNLoS)=( 0.1,750,8,0.1,21), 2) urban
Fig. 9. Reward vs. no. of episodes.
TABLE IV
RL H YPERPARAMETERS
(μ1,μ2,ρ,μ LoS,μNLoS)=( 0 .3,500,15,1,20), 3) dense
urban(μ1,μ2,ρ,μ LoS,μNLoS)=( 0 .5,300,20,1.6,23),
and 4) highrise urban (μ1,μ2,ρ,μ LoS,μNLoS)=
(0.5,300,50,2.3,34) [39]. We see that as the environ-
ment becomes denser, more energy is spent for data
collection. Indeed, due to obstacles and interference, commu-nication links are more likely to be degraded, thus causing a
shorter averaged UA V communication range. Consequently,
UA Vs have to ﬂy closer to CHs in order to collect data. In
contrast, in a less obstructed environment (e.g., suburban),
communication links are dominated by LoS, thus UA Vs cancommunicate with CHs through short displacements.
C. Online Path Planning Results
For the online approaches, we train a multi-task agent for
1024 episodes using replay memory and target network separa-tion to stabilize the training process. We assume that the DRL
agent employs three hidden fully-connected layers, composed
of 512 neurons for the ﬁrst two layers and 256 neurons for thelast one. The input layer size is the same as for the state space,
while the output layer size is equal to the total number of
actions. Moreover, we use rectiﬁed linear units (ReLU) as acti-
vation functions and the Adam optimizer for neural network
weights update. For maximum outcome, we tune and evaluatethe hyperparameters until the best performances are obtained.
The latter are summarized in Table IV.
Finally, exploration is performed in training using inde-
pendent/epsilon1-greedy action selection by the DRL agent over
its value-function Q. Throughout the training, /epsilon1is linearly
Authorized licensed use limited to: Hanoi University of Science & Technology. Downloaded on March 12,2026 at 08:18:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- PAGE 13 ---

1930 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GREEN COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 5, NO. 4, DECEMBER 2021
Fig. 10. AC-based trajectories.
Fig. 11. DDQN-based trajectories.
annealed from 1.0 to 0.01 over 500 episodes, then kept
constant for the remaining episodes.
For the subsequent simulations, we assume M=1800 IoT
sensors distributed within a square grid of size of 2000 ×2000
cells (an area of 2 ×2k m2), and using the same simulation
parameters of Table III. For each episode e, we assume that the
locations of SNs (and subsequently of CHs) are varying and
unknown for the UA Vs. The latter have to “blindly” explorethe cells and reach the CHs to collect the maximum amount
of data within the time and energy limitations.
In order to emphasize the efﬁciency of the proposed DRL
algorithms, we depict in Fig. 9 their convergence behaviors in
terms of reward (21), given three deployed UA Vs. As it can
be seen, DQN and AC are the fastest to converge (in less than100 episodes), while DDQN convergences after 400 episodes.
The slow convergence of DDQN is due to its architectural
complexity, composed of two parallel neural networks. Anyhow,
AC achieves the best performance due to its superiority through
the joint optimization of the value function and policy.
Based on the same IoT system design of Fig. 3, we depict
in Figs. 10–12 the online UA V trajectories obtained using AC,
DDQN, and DQN, respectively. As it can be seen, the DRLbased UA V trajectories cannot collect data from all CHs, and
are less energy-efﬁcient than the ones obtained in ofﬂine. This
Fig. 12. DQN-based trajectories.
Fig. 13. Collected data vs. path planning approaches and no. of UA Vs.
Fig. 14. Energy vs. no. of UA Vs.
is mainly due to the absence of knowledge of the CHs’ loca-
tions along the online paths. Nevertheless, AC-based solution
outperforms those of DQN and DDQN in terms of total UA V
consumed energy and number of visited CHs, which highlightsits higher intelligence in selecting better motion actions than
the other approaches.
For a fair comparison between the online DRL approaches,
we deﬁne the “percentage of collected data” metric, deﬁned as
the ratio of collected data from visited CHs to the total data to
Authorized licensed use limited to: Hanoi University of Science & Technology. Downloaded on March 12,2026 at 08:18:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- PAGE 14 ---

GHDIRI et al. : OFFLINE AND ONLINE UA V-ENABLED DATA COLLECTION IN TIME-CONSTRAINED IoT NETWORKS 1931
collect. In Fig. 13, we illustrate the results for different num-
bers of UA Vs, and where the ofﬂine Tabu search performanceis added as the upper-bound benchmark, called “OFF”. The
OFF method is able to collect most of the data (up to 100%
for 2 and 3 UA Vs) with respect to the deadlines since it hasa full knowledge of the system status, i.e., CHs locations and
deadlines. However, DQN, DDQN, and AC collect less data,
e.g., using 3 UA Vs, they collect 65%, 67%, and 74.5% withinthe deadlines respectively, but 87%, 93.5% and 94.7% when
including outdated collected data. The obtained DRL results
are very interesting, especially for AC, given the total absenceof information about the system at the UA Vs.
Fig. 14 shows the UA Vs’ normalized energy consump-
tion for the path planning approaches, where the consumed
energy is normalized over the percentage of visited CHs within
deadlines. AC achieves the best online performance, whichenhances with the number of UA Vs. This is expected since
AC is more efﬁcient in selecting on-the-ﬂy policies than DQN
and DDQN.
In the remaining results, we present only the performances
of the OFF and AC methods, for which we evaluate the impact
of the battery capacity and data collection deadline. For rapidexecution and convergence, we call for transfer learning [53],
which uses a pre-trained AC model in different environment
conditions.
Fig. 15 studies the impact of the battery capacity on the
performance of the system, for three deployed UA Vs. In terms
of the percentage of collected data within deadlines, we see thatfor a battery capacity less or equal to 1000 mAh, AC cannot
collect more than 5% of the data. However, for a battery capacity
larger than 1000 mAh, a maximum collected data of 60% is
obtained and cannot be outperformed, thus drawing the limit
of AC in this scenario. In contrast, OFF succeeds in collecting100% of the data starting from a battery capacity equal to 1500
mAh. In terms of energy consumption, AC consumes a high
amount of energy when the battery capacity is higher than1000 mAh. Indeed, UA Vs attempt to explore more CHs with
their additional energy, however, due to the system’s status lack
of knowledge, they often reach CHs after deadline expiration.Consequently, the optimal battery capacity of the AC method
is 1250 mAh, compared to 1500 mAh for the OFF method.
In Fig. 16, we investigate the impact of the deadline on
the performance of the system, given three deployed UA Vs.
In terms of percentage of collected data, as the deadline
increases, both OFF and AC improve until reaching a satu-ration value. Indeed, OFF saturates from deadline 150 sec, for
which 100% of the data is collected, while AC reaches a max-
imum of 90% starting from deadline 750 sec. This large gapis due to the advantageous knowledge of the system status
in the OFF method. From the energy consumption perspec-
tive, OFF reaches a consumption peak at deadline 150 sec,
then decreases, mainly due to better UA V paths. However,
AC consumes a lot of energy for short deadlines since theUA Vs waste energy exploring their environment without any
income. Then, it improves until reaching a stable value starting
from deadline 750 sec. Indeed, given a large deadline, the ACpolicy is capable of collecting more data that was previously
inaccessible or reached after deadline expiration.
Fig. 15. Data collect./energy vs. batt. cap.
Fig. 16. Data collect./energy vs. deadline.
VIII. C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we investigated the multi-UA V data collection
problem in clustered IoT networks, where sensed data have time
deadlines. Aiming to optimize the data collection deploymentcosts, we proposed a two-step solution. In the ﬁrst step, the
number and locations of CHs, which gather data from associ-
ated IoT sensors, are optimized using a customized K-meansapproach. Simulation results demonstrated the efﬁciency of our
proposed clustering method compared to baseline approaches.
Also, moving CHs closer to the UA V dockstation provideda signiﬁcant energy gain. For the data collection step, two
scenarios have been considered, namely ofﬂine and online.
For the ofﬂine setting, we showed that NN outperforms othermethods when UA Vs battery capacity is low and insufﬁcient
to collect data from all CHs. In contrast, with higher battery
capacity, trajectory-based meta-heuristics, in particular Tabu
search, achieved the best performances in terms of energy con-
sumption, while collecting 100% of the data. Moreover, weproved that UA V battery capacity needs to be carefully opti-
mized, and that the deadline constraint impacts signiﬁcantly
the system’s performance. Then, we illustrated the importanceof the environment’s type, where the UA Vs operate. For the
online setting, we found that AC outperforms DQN and DDQN
Authorized licensed use limited to: Hanoi University of Science & Technology. Downloaded on March 12,2026 at 08:18:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- PAGE 15 ---

1932 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GREEN COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 5, NO. 4, DECEMBER 2021
in terms of amount of collected data and energy consumption.
Indeed, AC is capable of collecting up to 90% of the data with-out any prior knowledge of the IoT network, given optimized
battery capacity and sufﬁciently high deadlines.
R
EFERENCES
[1] V . Chamola, V . Hassija, V . Gupta, and M. Guizani, “A comprehen-
sive review of the COVID-19 pandemic and the role of IoT, drones,
AI, blockchain, and 5G in managing its impact,” IEEE Access ,v o l .8 ,
pp. 90225–90265, 2020.
[2] L. Atzori, A. Iera, and G. Morabito, “The Internet of Things: A survey,”
Comput. Netw. , vol. 54, no. 15, pp. 2787–2805, Oct. 2010.
[3] A. Al-Fuqaha, M. Guizani, M. Mohammadi, M. Aledhari, and
M. Ayyash, “Internet of Things: A survey on enabling technologies, pro-tocols, and applications,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts. , vol. 17, no. 4,
pp. 2347–2376, 4th Quart., 2015.
[4] S. Alfattani, W. Jaafar, H. Yanikomeroglu, and A. Yongacoglu, “Multi-
UA V data collection framework for wireless sensor networks,” in
Proc. IEEE Global Comm. Conf. (GLOBECOM) , Waikoloa, HI, USA,
Dec. 2019, pp. 1–6.
[5] T. Kim and D. Qiao, “Energy-efﬁcient data collection for IoT networks
via cooperative multi-hop UA V networks,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol. ,
vol. 69, no. 11, pp. 13796–13811, Nov. 2020.
[6] M. Samir, S. Sharafeddine, C. M. Assi, T. M. Nguyen, and A. Ghrayeb,
“UA V trajectory planning for data collection from time-constrained IoT
devices,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun. , vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 34–46,
Jan. 2020.
[7] H. Hu, K. Xiong, G. Qu, Q. Ni, P. Fan, and K. B. Letaief, “AoI-minimal
trajectory planning and data collection in UA V-assisted wireless powered
IoT networks,” IEEE Internet Things J. , vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 1211–1223,
Jan. 2021.
[8] W. Jaafar and H. Yanikomeroglu, “Dynamics of laser-charged UA Vs:
A battery perspective,” IEEE Internet Things J. , vol. 8, no. 13,
pp. 10573–10582, Jul. 2021.
[9] J. K. Lenstra and A. H. G. R. Kan, “Complexity of vehicle routing and
scheduling problems,” Networks , vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 221–227, 1981.
[10] O. Ghdiri, W. Jaafar, S. Alfattani, J. B. Abderrazak, and
H. Yanikomeroglu, “Energy-efﬁcient multi-UA V data collectionfor IoT networks with time deadlines,” in Proc. IEEE Global Commun.
Conf. (GLOBECOM) , Taipei, Taiwan, Dec. 2020, pp. 1–6.
[11] M. M. Afsar and M.-H. Tayarani-N, “Clustering in sensor networks: A
literature survey,” Elsevier J. Netw. Comput. Appl. , vol. 46, pp. 198–226,
Nov. 2014.
[12] A. A. Abbasi and M. Younis, “A survey on clustering algorithms
for wireless sensor networks,” Elsevier Comput. Commun. , vol. 30,
nos. 14–15, pp. 2826–2841, Oct. 2007.
[13] L. Xu, R. Collier, and G. M. P. O’Hare, “A survey of clustering tech-
niques in WSNs and consideration of the challenges of applying such to
5G IoT scenarios,” IEEE Internet Things J. , vol. 4, no. 5, pp. 1229–1249,
Oct. 2017.
[14] D. Puschmann, P. Barnaghi, and R. Tafazolli, “Adaptive clustering for
dynamic IoT data streams,” IEEE Internet Things J. , vol. 4, no. 1,
pp. 64–74, Feb. 2017.
[15] X. Shao, C. Yang, D. Chen, N. Zhao, and F. R. Yu, “Dynamic IoT device
clustering and energy management with hybrid NOMA systems,” IEEE
Trans. Ind. Informat. , vol. 14, no. 10, pp. 4622–4630, Oct. 2018.
[16] A. Mukherjee, D. K. Jain, and L. Yang, “On-demand efﬁ-
cient clustering for next generation IoT applications: A hybrid
NN approach,” IEEE Sensors J. , early access, Sep. 25, 2020,
doi: 10.1109/JSEN.2020.3026647 .
[17] A. A.-H. Hassan, W. M. Shah, A.-H. H. Habeb, M. F. I. Othman, and
M. N. Al-Mhiqani, “An improved energy-efﬁcient clustering protocol
to prolong the lifetime of the WSN-based IoT,” IEEE Access ,v o l .8 ,
pp. 200500–200517, 2020.
[18] C. Zhan, Y . Zeng, and R. Zhang, “Energy-efﬁcient data collection in
UA V enabled wireless sensor network,” IEEE Wireless Commun. Lett. ,
vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 328–331, Jun. 2018.
[19] C. Zhan and Y . Zeng, “Aerial–ground cost tradeoff for multi-UA V-
enabled data collection in wireless sensor networks,” IEEE Trans.
Commun. , vol. 68, no. 3, pp. 1937–1950, Mar. 2020.
[20] C. You and R. Zhang, “Hybrid ofﬂine–online design for UA V-enabled
data harvesting in probabilistic LoS channels,” IEEE Trans. Wireless
Commun. , vol. 19, no. 6, pp. 3753–3768, Jun. 2020.[21] Z. Wang, R. Liu, Q. Liu, J. S. Thompson, and M. Kadoch, “Energy-
efﬁcient data collection and device positioning in UA V-assisted IoT,”IEEE Internet Things J. , vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 1122–1139, Feb. 2020.
[22] V . K. Chawra and G. P. Gupta, “Multiple UA V path-planning for data
collection in cluster-based wireless sensor network,” in Proc. Int. Conf
Power Control Comput. Technol. (ICPC2T) , Raipur, India, Jan. 2020,
pp. 194–198.
[23] C. Lin, G. Han, X. Qi, J. Du, T. Xu, and M. Martinez-García, “Energy-
optimal data collection for unmanned aerial vehicle-aided industrial
wireless sensor network-based agricultural monitoring system: A cluster-
ing compressed sampling approach,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat. , vol. 17,
no. 6, pp. 4411–4420, Jun. 2021.
[24] A. T. Albu-Salih and S. A. H. Seno, “Energy-efﬁcient data gathering
framework-based clustering via multiple UA Vs in deadline-based WSN
applications,” IEEE Access , vol. 6, pp. 72275–72286, 2018.
[25] S.-H. Yeh, Y .-S. Wang, T. D. P. Perera, Y .-W. P. Hong, and
D. N. K. Jayakody, “UA V trajectory optimization for data-gathering
from backscattering sensor networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun.
(ICC) , Dublin, Ireland, Jun. 2020, pp. 1–6.
[26] V . Mnih et al. , “Human-level control through deep reinforcement
learning,” Nature , vol. 518, pp. 529–533, Feb. 2015.
[27] J. Cui, Z. Ding, Y . Deng, A. Nallanathan, and L. Hanzo, “Adaptive UA V-
trajectory optimization under quality of service constraints: A model-free
solution,” IEEE Access , vol. 8, pp. 112253–112265, 2020.
[28] M. Yi, X. Wang, J. Liu, Y . Zhang, and B. Bai, “Deep reinforcement
learning for fresh data collection in UA V-assisted IoT networks,” in Proc.
IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun. Workshops. (INFOCOM WKSHPS) ,
Toronto, ON, Canada, Aug. 2020, pp. 716–721.
[29] P. Tong, J. Liu, X. Wang, B. Bai, and H. Dai, “Deep reinforcement
learning for efﬁcient data collection in UA V-aided Internet of Things,”
inProc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. Workshops. (ICC Wrkshps.) , Dublin,
Ireland, Jun. 2020, pp. 1–6.
[30] H. Bayerlein, M. Theile, M. Caccamo, and D. Gesbert, “UA V path
planning for wireless data harvesting: A deep reinforcement learning
approach,” in Proc. IEEE Global Commun. Conf. (GLOBECOM) , Taipei,
Taiwan, Dec. 2020, pp. 1–6.
[31] H. Bayerlein, M. Theile, M. Caccamo, and D. Gesbert, “Multi-UA V path
planning for wireless data harvesting with deep reinforcement learning,”IEEE Open J. Commun. Soc. , vol. 2, pp. 1171–1187, 2021.
[32] W. Liu, P. Si, E. Sun, M. Li, C. Fang, and Y . Zhang, “Green mobility
management in UA V-assisted IoT based on dueling DQN,” in Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Commun. (ICC) , Shanghai, China, May 2019, pp. 1–6.
[33] Y .-H. Hsu and R.-H. Gau, “Reinforcement learning-based collision
avoidance and optimal trajectory planning in UA V communication
networks,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput. , early access, Jun. 19, 2020,
doi: 10.1109/TMC.2020.3003639 .
[34] Y . Zhang, Z. Mou, F. Gao, L. Xing, J. Jiang, and Z. Han, “Hierarchical
deep reinforcement learning for backscattering data collection with
multiple UA Vs,” IEEE Internet Things J. , vol. 8, no. 5, pp. 3786–3800,
Mar. 2021.
[35] O. Bouhamed, H. Ghazzai, H. Besbes, and Y . Massoud, “A UA V-assisted
data collection for wireless sensor networks: Autonomous navigation and
scheduling,” IEEE Access , vol. 8, pp. 110446–110460, 2020.
[36] W. B. Heinzelman, A. P. Chandrakasan, and H. Balakrishnan, “An
application-speciﬁc protocol architecture for wireless microsensornetworks,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun. , vol. 1, no. 4, pp. 660–670,
Oct. 2002.
[37] S. H. Kang and T. Nguyen, “Distance based thresholds for cluster head
selection in wireless sensor networks,” IEEE Commun. Lett. , vol. 16,
no. 9, pp. 1396–1399, Sep. 2012.
[38] A. Al-Hourani, K. Sithamparanathan, and S. Lardner, “Optimal LAP
altitude for maximum coverage,” IEEE Wireless Commun. Lett.
,v o l .3 ,
no. 6, pp. 569–572, Dec. 2014.
[39] H. Kang, J. Joung, J. Ahn, and J. Kang, “Secrecy-aware altitude
optimization for quasi-static UA V base station without eavesdropper
location information,” IEEE Commun. Lett. , vol. 23, no. 5, pp. 851–854,
May 2019.
[40] Y . Zeng, J. Xu, and R. Zhang, “Energy minimization for wireless com-
munication with rotary-wing UA V ,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun. ,
vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 2329–2345, Apr. 2019.
[41] F. Preparata and M. Shamos, Computational Geometry: An Introduction .
New York, NY , USA: Springer-Verlag, 1993.
[42] R. Hwang, R. Chang, and R. Lee, “The searching over separators
strategy to solve some NP-hard problems in subexponential time,”
Algorithmica , vol. 9, pp. 398–423, Apr. 1993.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Hanoi University of Science & Technology. Downloaded on March 12,2026 at 08:18:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- PAGE 16 ---

GHDIRI et al. : OFFLINE AND ONLINE UA V-ENABLED DATA COLLECTION IN TIME-CONSTRAINED IoT NETWORKS 1933
[43] W. R. Heinzelman, A. Chandrakasan, and H. Balakrishnan, “Energy-
efﬁcient communication protocol for wireless microsensor networks,”inProc. Annu. Hawaii Int. Conf. Syst. Sci. , Jan. 2000, p. 10.
[44] T. Kanungo, D. M. Mount, N. S. Netanyahu, C. D. Piatko, R. Silverman,
and A. Y . Wu, “An efﬁcient k-means clustering algorithm: Analysis and
implementation,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. , vol. 24, no. 7,
pp. 881–892, Jul. 2002.
[45] F. Nielsen, Ch. 8: Hierarchical Clustering—Introduction to HPC With
MPI for Data Science . Cham, Switzerland: Springer Int., 2016.
[46] C. Blum and A. Roli, “Metaheuristics in combinatorial optimization:
Overview and conceptual comparison,” ACM Comput. Surveys , vol. 35,
no. 3, pp. 268–308, Sep. 2003.
[47] D. Knuth. (2020). Capacitated Vehicle Routing Problem, OR-Tools .
[Online]. Available: https://developers.google.com/optimization/routing/cvrp
[48] O. Ghdiri. Codes for Paper Ofﬂine and Online UAV-Enabled Data
Collection in Time-Constrained IoT Networks . Accessed: Jul. 15, 2021.
[Online]. Available: https://github.com/GO-13/TGCN
[49] Z. Beheshti and S. M. H. Shamsuddin, “A review of population-based
meta-heuristic algorithm,” Int. J. Adv. Soft Comput. Appl. , vol. 5, no. 1,
pp. 1–35, Mar. 2013.
[50] D. C. Marinescu, “Chapter 12—Big data, data streaming, and the mobile
cloud,” in Cloud Computing: Theory and Practice , 2nd ed. Cambridge,
MA, USA: Morgan Kaufmann, 2018, pp. 439–487.
[51] H. V . Hasselt, A. Guez, and D. Silver, “Deep reinforcement learning with
double Q-learning,” in Proc. 30th Conf. Artif. Intell. (AAAI) , Feb. 2016,
pp. 2094–2100.
[52] S. Bhatnagar, R. S. Sutton, M. Ghavamzadeh, and M. Lee,
“Natural actor–critic algorithms,” Elsevier Automatica , vol. 45, no. 11,
pp. 2471–2482, Nov. 2009.
[53] Z. Zhu, K. Lin, and J. Zhou, “Transfer learning in deep reinforcement
learning: A survey,” Sep. 2020. [Online]. Available: arXiv:2009.07888.
Oussama Ghdiri received the B.Eng. degree in soft-
ware engineering from ESPRIT Engineering School,
Tunis, Tunisia, in 2021. He was a Research Internwith the Department of Systems and Computer
Engineering, Carleton University, Ottawa, ON,
Canada, from March 2020 to April 2021. His currentresearch interests include the application of AI andML in next generation terrestrial and non-terrestrial
networks.
Wael Jaafar (Senior Member, IEEE) received
the B.Eng. degree from the Higher School ofCommunication, Tunis, Tunisia, in 2007, and the
M.A.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineer-
ing from Polytechnique Montreal, Montreal, QC,Canada, in 2009 and 2014, respectively. He was
a Visiting Research Intern with the Department of
Computer Science, UQAM, Montreal, QC, Canada,from February 2007 to April 2007, and a VisitingResearcher with Keio University, Tokyo, Japan,
from March 2013 to June 2013, and with Khalifa
University, Abu Dhabi, UAE, from November to December 2019. From2014 to 2017, he has pursued a career with the telecommunications indus-try. In 2018, he held a Research Fellow and a Lecturer positions with the
Computer Science Department, UQAM. In December 2018, he joined the
Systems and Computer Engineering Department, Carleton University as anNSERC Postdoctoral Fellow. His current research interests include terres-trial and non-terrestrial communications, 6G and beyond technologies, and
machine learning.
Safwan Alfattani (Student Member, IEEE) received
the B.S. degree from King Abdul Aziz University,Saudi Arabia, and the M.Sc. degree from theUniversity of Ottawa, where he is currently pursuing
the Ph.D. degree. His research interests include non-
terrestrial networks, reconﬁgurable smart surfaces,and IoT networks.
Jihene Ben Abderrazak received the B.Eng.
degree from the Higher School of Communication
(SUPCOM), Tunis, Tunisia, in 2006, the M.A.Sc.
degree in computer science from the University ofTsukuba, Japan, in 2010, and the Ph.D. degree ininformation and communication technology from
SUPCOM in 2018. She is currently a Research
Assistant with ESPRIT Engineering School, Tunis,and is leading the Wireless Communications
Research Team. Her current research interests
include future wireless networks, smart agriculture,
autonomous vehicles, and machine learning.
Halim Yanikomeroglu (Fellow, IEEE) is currently
a Professor with the Department of Systems and
Computer Engineering, Carleton University, Ottawa,
ON, Canada. His current research interest includesmany aspects of 5G/6G wireless networks. His col-laborative research with industry has resulted in 37
granted patents. He received several awards for his
research, teaching, and service, including the IEEECommunications Society Wireless CommunicationsTechnical Committee Recognition Award, in 2018,
and the IEEE Vehicular Technology Society Stuart
Meyer Memorial Award, in 2020. He was the Technical Program Chair/Co-Chair of Wireless Communications and Networking Conference (WCNC)2004, Atlanta, WCNC 2008, Las Vegas, and WCNC 2014, Istanbul, and
the General Chair of IEEE VTC 2010-Fall, Ottawa, and VTC 2017-Fall,
Toronto. He has also served as the Chair for the IEEE’s Technical Committeeon Personal Communications. He is serving as the Chair for the IEEE
WCNC Steering Committee. He is also a Distinguished Speaker of IEEE
Communications Society and IEEE Vehicular Technology Society. He is aFellow of the Engineering Institute of Canada and the Canadian Academy ofEngineering.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Hanoi University of Science & Technology. Downloaded on March 12,2026 at 08:18:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 