--- PAGE 1 ---

 UAV as a Data Ferry for a Sparse Adaptive WSN   
Pejman A. Karegar and Adnan Al-Anbuky  
Electrical and Electronic Engineering  
Auckland University of Technology  
Auckland, New Zealand 
Email: {pejman.karegar, Adnan.Anbuky}@aut.ac.nz 
 
 
Abstract —Using UAVs as mobile data ferries can amplify groun d 
network performance by mitigating the impact of hor izontal radio 
pollution on the environment. Designing an energy-e fficient UAV 
communication with a randomly distributed ground se nsors via 
enhancing the ground network structure dependent to  the UAV 
path has been one of the challenges for the UAV-ass isted WSN 
data gathering efforts. This paper aims at developi ng an approach 
c a l l e d  ‘ U A V  F u z z y  T r a v e l  P a t h ’  t h a t  s u p p o r t s  U A V  s m ooth 
trajectory planning in gathering data of distribute d wireless 
sensors over a large space. The dynamic orchestrati on of ground 
wireless sensors grouping has been considered in th is paper for 
improving the network performance in data collectio n. This offers 
a more dynamic and flexible network that interact w ith the UAV 
planned path. Preliminary results of testbed simula tions reflect 
that the proposed software define ground network sy stem has 
presented promising outcomes in terms of network performances 
such as network latency and packet delivery rate.  Further work 
is required for testing the scheme on a wider range  of software 
defined WSN and UAV flight formations. 
 
Keywords—Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV), Wireless Sen sor 
Networks (WSN), Fuzzy UAV route, UAV path Planning 
I. INTRODUCTION  
In the last decades, WSNs have witnessed explosive growth 
among the research hot topics. Radio pollution and energy 
efficiency are of significant challenges within lon g range ground 
network communication. There are various approaches to 
mitigate the energy usage and radio pollution of ground 
networks. One solution is through the usage of UAV which 
offers more flexibility and manoeuvrability in both  data 
capturing and coverage capabilities’ used cases. This can 
significantly reduce the energy consumption of the entire system 
by timely scheduling the air-to-Ground communication based 
on the UAV’s presence [1]. In this regard, Chiaraviglio, L. et al. 
[2] have proposed an energy-efficient approach for UAV-aided 
cellular network used case that provides preferable  
performances in both throughput maximization and en ergy 
optimisation based on realistic scenarios.  Considering wireless 
network energy efficiency and fairness in UAV-enabled data 
gathering used case, Software-Defined Network (SDN)  
approach has recently attracted much attention, whe re the 
control plane has been separated from the data plan e using a 
central controller such as a cloud computation proc essor. The 
control plane carries the logical processes and all  relevant 
decisions regarding managing network structure, whi le the data 
plane delivers the packets towards the most appropr iate 
interfaces which is the cloud processing centre. The separation of these two planes allows to route traffic intelli gently and 
optimally reorchestrate the network structures base d on the 
network requirement performances to benefit WSN in terms of 
network components’ energy usages [3]. This paper a ims at 
taking advantage of designing low-complexity and sm ooth 
trajectory that enables the UAV to interact with up dated SNs 
representatives through SDN reorchestration process . The main 
contributions of the paper are summarized as follow . First, we 
apply the concept of software defined WSN on UAV fl ight path 
region called ‘UAV Fuzzy Path’ considering the abil ity for 
dynamic network reorchestration. This offers the fl exibility for 
the UAV path design through the re-election of the gateways 
within the ground sensor nodes to fit the relaxed p ath. Next, we 
utilise a software defined dynamic topology reorche stration 
process in which the role of network components has  been 
identified based on a proposed fitness model. To fa cilitate the 
communication interaction between the UAV and the g round 
network, an SDN-enabled control/data packet frame has been 
designed to transfer the control/data plane through both 
configuration and execution phases. The rest of thi s paper is 
organized as follows. In the next section, we discu ss previous 
related works. Section III presents the proposed al gorithms. 
Section IV evaluates the proposed algorithm through extensive 
simulations. Section V concludes this paper and giv es some 
future work suggestions.  
II. RELATED  WORK 
Numerous studies have dealt with data collection us ed cases 
of the UAV from a distributed sensor network where the UAV 
visits the sensor nodes one by one or through the sensor nodes 
representatives. The aim is to maximise the network  
performance by mitigating the risk of high network latency and 
packet drop rate to identify the shortest UAV path that can serve 
the maximum data points within the permissible oper ational link 
during a limited flight time. To this end, Karunani thy et al. [4] 
utilised UAV as an intelligent data collector for water irrigation 
application in which a number of randomly distributed sensor 
nodes disseminated their data to the UAV based on a suggested 
UAV-Ground communication structure. To minimise sig nal 
attenuation, they proposed a communication transact ion 
diagram in which the UAV initiates the communicatio n by 
broadcasting a beacon signal to the corresponding S Ns. To 
guarantee that the relevant sensing data packets ha ve been 
uploaded to the UAV properly, Samir et al. [5] has suggested a 
novel data collection algorithm from the time const rained IoT 
devices. However, with rising the number of distributed sensor 
284
978-1-6654-9927-9/22/$31.00 ©2022 IEEE APCC 20222022 27th Asia Pacific Conference on Communications (APCC) | 978-1-6654-9927-9/22/$31.00 ©2022 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/APCC55198.2022.9943645
Authorized licensed use limited to: Hanoi University of Science & Technology. Downloaded on March 12,2026 at 08:23:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- PAGE 2 ---

nodes in the field, the complexity of the system is  excessively 
high that declines the data capturing fairness among the network 
components. The Software defined Network (SDN) concept has 
been reflected in multiple applications such as off loading the 
computation of UAV-assisted vehicles network to exe cute 
computationally complex and time-sensitive tasks wh ile at the 
same time mitigating the risk of higher network latency and 
packet drop rate [6]. Zhang et al. [7] have also ut ilised SDN 
concept at internet of UAVs where the entire networ k can 
“forward looking” the uploaded information to potentially idle 
nodes in order to achieve the optimized system perf ormance [8]. 
Furthermore, to examine the realistic communication  link prior 
to the real-world implementation testing, there are  several 
methods to virtualise the network behaviour within the cloud 
[9]. Many researchers now consider WSN virtualizati on as a key 
enabling technology in their WSN deployments. Achar yya et al. 
[10] propose the WSN virtualization unit which util ises Cooja 
network simulator running the virtual sensor cloud model that 
supports SDN concept. Al-Hamid et al. [11] suggest the concept 
of virtualisation for the vehicular network formati on and 
grouping. Moreover, Samir et al. [12] have utilised a novel 
design for UAV-aided vehicular networks to process fresh 
information before the carried information loses its value prior 
to transferring to the UAV. The UAV data gathering method can 
be enhanced through the analysis of the UAV flight path and the 
integration with softwarization concept. In our pre vious work 
[13], the preliminary idea of fuzzy path approach has been 
studied. In this paper, the proposed approach consi ders a 
geographical grouping structure with one or more re presentative 
nodes that can act as ground data collection point( s). 
Nomination of the active collection points will the n be made 
according to the proposed fitness model design within the cloud. 
This not only leads to a more efficient and smooth UAV travel 
planning but can help to route the network traffic fairly. The 
UAV smooth flight path should be aligned with the u pdated 
network structure analysis bringing fairness on the  power 
consumption of gateway capable nodes per round. The  scheme 
has been modelled and tested using Contiki Cooja ne twork 
simulator.  
 
III. SYSTEM MODEL 
UAV based data collection is typically based on eit her 
direct communication with individual nodes or through group 
representative nodes (are referred to as gateways).  Based on this 
arrangement, while the grouping offers more efficient approach 
for communicating the data, it still restricts the UAV path for 
collecting the data to limited options once physica l topology of 
each group on ground sensor nodes is set. The quest ion here is, 
can we relax the options for the UAV path by allowi ng the 
gateways to be selected to align with the global da ta collection 
path? This allows for the groups topologies to be r edefined 
through software dynamically. Here, the gateways co uld be 
software redefined to suite the travel route defini tion. The above 
stated concept of creating what we refer to as a ‘F uzzy flight 
Path’ utilizes the capability to software redefine the groups 
representatives or network topology to align with t he UAV flight smooth path. The fuzzy path concept is based on the  capability 
of switching the sensor node from a leaf node funct ionality to a 
gateway one. These sensor nodes are referred as gat eway-
capable nodes. The proposed topology organization e ases the 
UAV path design by bringing the efficient and smoot h path 
within the proposed UAV path fuzzy range and offeri ng the 
flexibility of adaptive gateway selection closer to  the UAV path. 
An example of smooth UAV path has been shown in Fig.1-IV. 
The proposed model is highly dependent on the perce ntage of 
gateway-capable nodes distribution. As shown in Fig .1 I-IV, the 
nominated gateways have been represented with solid -line 
circles for each group while the remining potential  gateways 
have been depicted with dashed-line circles in the network 
structure.  
 
           
I. II. 
              
                              III.                                                                                       IV. 
Fig.1 the design of fuzzy route and smooth path wit h various distribution of 
gateway-capable nodes (from Fig. I to Fig. IV. the distribution of gateway-
capable nodes increased)  
 
A. The proposed network communication system 
The proposed network communication structure plan 
is based on dividing the entire system into three m ain 
communicating sub-units: Ground Network, Drone, Clo ud 
stations. Ground Network may contain three types of  nodes that 
are identified as three main roles in WSN. These ar e Leaf, 
Router and Gateway roles. A given node may have one  or more 
of these roles at the same time. The drone station is the mobile 
vehicle serves to capture the data from ground and relay it to 
the cloud over the Internet for real-time post-processing 
assessments and virtualization of main stations. Th e network 
communication messages are split into two main mess ages: 
sensing data information messages and control infor mation 
messages. As the main goal of data acquisition effo rt is on 
passing the sensing data information messages, the control 
information messages have the responsibility to con vey the 
ground network topological configuration data such as election 
data from the cloud-level to the ground network and  assigning 
the optimal functions to each component of the netw ork in the 
285
Authorized licensed use limited to: Hanoi University of Science & Technology. Downloaded on March 12,2026 at 08:23:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- PAGE 3 ---

initial configuration phase. The proposed generic t opological 
arrangement has been depicted in Fig.2. The communi cation 
dialogue among the three acting sub-units includes both 
configuration planning and data collection executio n phases. 
Configuration planning phase aims at: 
1. Collecting the control data by the UAV on available  
gateways and the relevant nodes that can access the m 
and passing the control data to the Cloud. 
2.  Cloud level analysis of the collected control data and 
identifying the elected gateways and related networ k 
structure and operational parameters. 
3.  Passing the outcomes of the analysis from cloud to  the 
ground networks within control data information 
offering the updated ground networks set up. 
The data collection execution phase is a subsequent  phase 
running the UAV movement within the designed update d fuzzy 
route in collecting the ground sensing data. 
 
B. Various roles in the network system 
I. Leaf node 
These nodes are predefined as leaf nodes prior to t he UAV 
traveling; They are not in direct connection with t he UAV either 
through the control information transmission phase or data 
gathering phase. Leaf nodes have the key functional ity of the 
data acquisition from connected sensors and passing  the sensing 
data information as well as the critical control in formation to 
the upper-level routers or gateways. Leaf nodes als o have the 
capability of being software redefined, both throug h a given 
upper-level router or through operational functiona lities such as 
activation or deactivation of a given query or data processing 
function.  
 
II. Router-Capable node 
These nodes have the capability to be software defi ned as 
a fully functioned Router node or a reduced functio ned Leaf 
node by the control packets received through the ga teway. Once 
they have been elected as routers, they can transfer the 
information from other leaf nodes through multi-hop  
communication protocol to an upper-layer router or active 
gateway(s). They are assumed not to have direct con nectivity 
with the UAV. Their roles as routers/leaf nodes are  assigned by 
the UAV in the initial configuration phase.  
 
III. Gateway-Capable node 
These nodes have the capability to be software defi ned to 
act as Gateways, Routers, and/or Leaf nodes. Since they have 
been distributed in random positions within each gr oup, they 
can offer different network topologies such as tree or star ones 
for each group depending on their updated softwariz ed 
functionalities. They also define the fuzzy region of the UAV 
path. Once they have been elected as the Gateways f or a given 
network of sensors, they have been assigned to capt ure the data 
information coming from the leaf and router nodes a nd forward 
that to the drone in the execution phase. Their rol es have been notified by the drone in the configuration phase. I n a large-scale 
distribution of networks, the topological arrangeme nt may 
consist of more than one node configured as a gatew ay by the 
remote cloud server. Although the presence of multi ple 
gateways causes distributed burst of data forwarded  to the 
drone, utilising multiple gateways in a large-scale  can help to 
prevent rapid energy draining of the limited number  of 
gateway-configured nodes, and it improves the relia bility by 
mitigating the risk of the failure of a single gate way. It will also 
help offering the wider option of UAV fuzzy route w here the 
route can dynamically be changed to suit either the drone flight 
path or the ground role redistribution in balancing the energy 
expenditure. 
 
 
Fig.2 topological arrangement for WSN data gatherin g 
  
IV. Drone-level 
The UAV serves as an access point to the remote clo ud 
server via acting as an upper-level router between the Gateways 
and the cloud platform (for both upstream flow of c ontrol data 
of the topological setting phase relevant to availa ble regional 
nodes and the normal operational process of data co llection 
phase and downstream flow of reconfiguration of sta tions). 
Once the ground networks are defined, the UAV can r esume 
regular ground sensing data collection. 
 
V. Cloud-level computation 
The UAV transfers the status of the ground nodes ca pability 
data to the cloud where the decisions for gateway and router 
elections have been made by utilising a proposed fi tness model. 
Once the decisions have been made, the UAV fuzzy region as 
well as the elected gateways and routers for each g roup are 
assigned to each node’s ID within the remote cloud server. Later, 
the decisions return to the elected routers and gat eways as well 
as their specified leaf-nodes through the notificat ion messages 
to reorchestrate the ground network configuration. Furthermore, 
the cloud here is the main station for post-process ing of the real-
world data information acquired from drone and virt ualising the 
network components and topology.  
286
Authorized licensed use limited to: Hanoi University of Science & Technology. Downloaded on March 12,2026 at 08:23:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- PAGE 4 ---

C. Communication messages 
The communication among the UAV and ground is based on a 
set of control/sensing data information messages th at needs to 
be passed over the cloud to either get the network configured 
during the configuration phase or gather the sensing data 
through execution phase. The sequence diagram of the 
messages’ transmission within the control and data flow 
execution phases has been depicted in Fig.3. The 
communication messages transaction among each netwo rk 
component has been designed as follows: 
Once the gateway nodes receive _  (message 
number one in Fig.3) from the UAV, they pass the me ssage to 
the routers and lower-level leaf nodes to inform about the 
presence of the UAV. Then the nodes switch their tr ansmitter on 
to broadcast their initial predefined functionaliti es (Leaf node, 
potential router, or potential gateway), along with  the sensor’s 
position, the magnitude of   and battery power level which 
are three criteria on defining the fitness model el ection over 
cloud computation ( _  within message number two in Fig. 
3). The proposed packet frame format for _  in UAV-
Ground communication is suggested based on Fig. 4. The first 
message field of the payload within the proposed fr ame involves 
the transferring time slot along with the ID of the  corresponding 
Router/Gateway. The next three packet fields involve 
‘maximum capacity’, ‘current number of connected no des’ and 
‘current level’ reflecting the updated ground netwo rk structure. 
The ‘maximum capacity’ packet field places a bounda ry on the 
maximum number of supported nodes (leaf or lower-le vel router 
nodes) of each router/gateway node. The ‘current number of 
connected nodes’ field represents the current numbe r of attached 
nodes (leaf/lower router nodes) to the router/gatew ay. The 
‘current level’ message field stands for the level of the 
corresponding node with respect to the higher-level  gateway. 
Finally, the last three fields consist of the three  operational 
factors associated with gateway/router own data inc luding 
‘RSSI’, ‘battery level’ and ‘relative location’ whi ch are the key 
factors in fitness model decision making. The lengt h of data 
frame body for _  is highly dependent on the number of 
ground networks transferring to the UAV in the init ial 
configuration phase, which is assumed variable here . 
 
 
Fig. 3 Sequence diagram illustrating the messages t ransmission through control 
and data information dissemination phases Then, once the election decision has been made with in the 
remote cloud server, the UAV serves to notify the u pdated 
elected gateways and routers on their new roles by disseminating 
 messages (messages number three). The potential ro uters 
and gateways that are not selected as router and gateway have 
been switched over to the role of reduced functione d leaf nodes 
( message notifies the updated function definition p lus 
information about the SSID of the lower and upper-l evel nodes).  
 
 
Fig.4 the control packet frame design in configurat ion phase on UAV-Ground 
network 
 
The suggested data packet frame for  on notifying on 
the updated ground functionalities is designed as F ig.5. Besides 
the ‘SSID’ segment of transferred packet field in t he notification 
data frame, the ‘functionality’ packet field repres ents the 
updated functionality of the potential node (either  Gateway or 
Router). This packet field consists of 2 octets cre ating multiple 
functional messages by utilising a binary code. Fur thermore, 
within the ‘SSID Lower-Level’ segments, the node ID s of 
involved leaf nodes or lower routers have been assi gned. The 
‘SSID Higher-Level’ packet specifies the ID of a hi gher-level 
node either a Gateway or a router. These two segmen ts in the 
packet frame design reflect the number of updated u pper level 
and lower-level connections per node. These packet frames are 
relayed to the potential router/gateway nodes in in itial 
configuration phase to redefine the functionality o f the potential 
nodes plus to reorchestrate the entire network stru cture based on 
the updated connections among nodes. For assigning the lower-
level nodes to the higher-level ones (such as assigning a number 
of leaf nodes to a specified router), the Euclidean  distance 
among the leaf nodes and the router has been considered for 
updated groups’ formation. The length of data frame  body for 
 is highly dependent on the number of potential 
routers/gateways distributed in the network, which is considered 
as variable here.  
 
 
Fig.5 packet frame design for notification messages  coming from the UAV to 
the Ground (Routers and Gateways) 
 
Finally in the software-defined execution phase, on ce the 
UAV returns to the elected gateways, the normal flo w of sensed 
data from the leaf nodes relaying to the elected ro uter and 
gateway (messages number 4) resumes and passes over  the 
UAV (message number 5).  
287
Authorized licensed use limited to: Hanoi University of Science & Technology. Downloaded on March 12,2026 at 08:23:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- PAGE 5 ---

D. Fitness election model 
The suggested parameters in the fitness model elect ion 
process for the involved potential gateways and routers are 
briefly expressed as: Link quality based on Radio Signal 
Strength Intensity (RSSI):  The link quality between a UAV 
and its neighbour gateways is obtained by using the  information 
of received signal strength indication (RSSI) of re ceived 
packets. The link quality between UAV and each netw ork 
component, LQ can be expressed as [6]: 
 
  =

−


         (1)  
 
Here,  is the total number of RSSI samples received on 
the UAV from each gateway and  is the RSSI value of the -
th sample. Lower the LQ parameter is the higher lik elihood of 
electing as gateway and router node. Battery power level:  The 
battery level of each participant router/gateway  is another 
parameter in fitness election model. More the gatew ay and 
router participate in the data flow dissemination, the amount of 
their remained batteries is dropped more. Fuzzy path distance 
factor:  The portion of proximity of the UAV smooth path to  
the gateway-capable nodes  is presumed as another factor for 
gateway/router election process. The intention here is to 
manipulate the data gathering UAV path to get it closer to the 
smooth deigned path sequentially which can be done as a part 
of cloud computation. Consequently, the fitness mod el for the 
gateway/router election is mathematically expressed  as bellow: 
 
_ =  ×   +× +×                (2) 
 
   is the link quality factor of the gateway node th 
received on the UAV.  is the battery power level of gateway 
node th.  is the fuzzy path distance factor of gateway node 
th.  ,  and  denote three weights assigned for each of three 
parameters dependent on the priority of each factor  based on the 
updated network structure.  
 
IV. MODEL  TESTING  AND  EVALUATION   
Based on the defined step process of software defin ed 
communication system among the network components, the 
model has been categorized into the proposed major sub 
processes as following. The preliminary model on gr ound 
network has been analysed based on Contiki Cooja ne twork 
simulator. 
 
A. Software defined configuration phase simulation 
outcomes 
The ground simulation model consists of three group s of 
nodes (Leaf, Router and Gateway nodes) which are di spersed 
randomly on the field to pass the control/sensing data 
information to the UAV and cloud for initial/post p rocessing 
computations. The communication transactions among one group of sensor nodes considering the initial confi guration 
phase have been illustrated within Fig. 6. The aver age network 
latency performance measure has been calculated for  each hop 
by Cooja network simulator. The control packet fram e has been 
defined the same as the proposed packet frame in th e last 
section. As shown in Fig.6, after receiving the _  from 
the UAV on the receiver of each node, the communication 
transaction is initiated from the leaf nodes to upp er levels. In 
the second round, once the remote server works out on the 
election of software defined nodes, the UAV returns  to inform 
the elected routers and gateways on their new roles  based on the 
proposed packet frame designed on Fig. 5. On the next round, 
the network structure is reconfigured based on the new 
functions allocation and the UAV captures the lates t data based 
on the updated router and gateway node’s functional ity. Table. 
1 has depicted the network performance for the desi gned 
configuration phase for one transaction of control data flow.   
 
 
Fig.6 the simulated network architecture for one sp ecified group 
 
Table.1 the network performance for the designed in itial configuration phase 
for one transaction of control data flow 
Leaf Node Transmitted Packets 9 Packets 
Router Transmitted Packets     12 Packets + Packets disseminated 
by other Lower-Level Nodes 
Accumulated Packets 
 Received on GW 33 Packets 
Transmission Rate/Polling 
Rate  () 1 Sample per Second 
Number of Hops First 
Hop  
Latency Second 
Hop 
Latency  Third 
Hop 
Latency End-to-
end 
Latency 
Average Network Latency 
() 455 480 535 1520 
 
B. Software defined execution phase simulation outc omes 
The air-to-ground communication interaction among t he 
UAV and gateway nodes has been simulated in CupCarb on. It 
is presumed that the UAV starts its trajectory from  a point 
outside the communication window of gateways and 
sequentially travels through each gateway’s connect ivity 
window and finally departs from the associated wind ow of last 
gateway. The percentage of the gateway-capable nodes’ 
distribution, D, is scaled up from 5% to 30% of the  entire sensor 
nodes population to evaluate the network communicat ion 
288
Authorized licensed use limited to: Hanoi University of Science & Technology. Downloaded on March 12,2026 at 08:23:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- PAGE 6 ---

performance. Furthermore, the impact of UAV velocit y on the 
network efficiency has been assessed. Fig. 7 has in dicated the 
impact of different ranges of UAV speed on the pack et delivery 
ratio starting from  = 5 /  to  = 40 / . With increasing 
the UAV speed, the number of dropped packets has been 
grown, since the UAV has shorter time to communicat e with 
the gateways.  
 
Fig.7 the effect of increasing the speed of the UAV  on Packet Delivery 
Ratio [13] 
 
 
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK  
This work introduced a concept that could offer an energy 
efficient UAV assisted WSN data gathering model. Th e 
approach uses software defined network for the dist ributed 
sensor networks over large spaces. The dynamic orch estration 
of the ground network has been contributed by provi ding 
flexibility in setting the UAV flight path. This of fers potentials 
for efficient UAV data collection mission in both f ield coverage 
and flight energy consumption. The ground network 
performance has been improved through the WSNs capa bility 
for dynamically assigning the data routing nodes ba sed on the 
UAV trajectory within a region called fuzzy path. F or future 
work, further validation of this concept through fi ne tuning of 
the UAV path and WSN dynamics and reducing the over head 
required for the dynamic orchestration within vario us used 
cases, scales of networks and operation domains wil l be 
conducted.   
VI. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS   
This work is supported by New Zealand Callaghan 
Innovation Funding for Auckland University of Technology 
and Envico Ltd. under the contract number of 
EACTE1901/PROP-65197-FELLOW-EACTE. 
 
REFERENCES  
[1]    Zhan, C., Y. Zeng, and R. Zhang, “Energy -eff icient data collection in 
UAV enabled wireless sensor network”, IEEE Wireless  Communications 
Letters, 2017, pp. 328-331. 
[2]      Chiaraviglio, L., D’Andreagiovanni, F., Li u, W., Gutierrez, J. A., Blefari-
Melazzi, N., Choo, K. K. R., & Alouini, M. S., “Mul ti-area throughput and 
energy optimization of UAV-aided cellular networks powered by solar panels 
and grid”. IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing, 2 020, 2427-2444. 
[3]    B. G. Assefa and Ö. Özkasap, “A survey of en ergy efficiency in SDN: 
Software-based methods and optimization models”, J.  Netw. Comput. 
Appl., vol. 137, pp. 127_143, 2019. 
[4]      Karunanithy, K. and B. Velusamy. “Energy efficient cluster and travelling 
salesman problem-based data collection using WSNs f or Intelligent water 
irrigation and fertigation”. Measurement, 2020, pp. 107835. 
[5]     Samir, M., Sharafeddine, S., Assi, C. M., N guyen, T. M., & Ghrayeb, A., 
“UAV trajectory planning for data collection from t ime-constrained IoT 
devices”. IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communicati ons, 2019, pp. 34-46. 
[6]   Pu, C., “Link-quality and traffic-load aware routing for UAV ad hoc 
networks”. In 2018 IEEE 4th International conferenc e on collaboration and 
internet computing (CIC), PA, USA, 2018, pp. 71-79. IEEE. 
[7]    Zhang, C., Dong, M., & Ota, K., “Deploying S DN control in Internet of 
UAVs: Q-learning-based edge scheduling”. IEEE Transactions on Network and 
Service Management, 2021, 18(1), 526-537.  
[8]     Zhang, C., Dong, M., & Ota, K., “Deploying SDN cont rol in Internet of UAVs: 
Q-learning-based edge scheduling”. IEEE Transactions on Network and Service 
Management, 2021, 526-537. 
[9]       Al-Hamid, D. Z . and A. Al-Anbuky, “ Vehicular Grouping Protocol: Towards 
Cyber Physical Network Intelligence ”. 2021 IEEE International Conferences on 
Internet of Things (iThings) , 2021, IEEE. 
[10]  Acharyya, I.S., A. Al-Anbuky, and S. Sivaramakrishnan, “Software-
defined sensor networks: towards flexible architect ure supported by 
virtualization”. 2019 Global IoT Summit (GIoTS), Aarhus, Denmark. IEEE. 
[11]   Al-Hamid, D.Z. and A. Al-Anbuky, “Vehicular grouping and network 
formation: virtualization of network self-healing”.  International Conference on 
Internet of Vehicles, Paris, France, 2018, Springer . 
[12]    A Samir, M., Assi, C., Sharafeddine, S., Eb rahimi, D., & Ghrayeb, A., 
“Age of information aware trajectory planning of UA Vs in intelligent 
transportation systems: A deep learning approach”. IEEE Transactions on 
Vehicular Technology, 2020, 69(11). 
[13]     Karegar, P. A., & Al-Anbuky, A., “Travel P ath Planning for UAV as a 
Data Collector for a Sparse WSN”. 17th Internationa l Conference on 
Distributed Computing in Sensor Systems (DCOSS), Vi rtual Event, 2021, pp. 
359-366, IEE
 
289
Authorized licensed use limited to: Hanoi University of Science & Technology. Downloaded on March 12,2026 at 08:23:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 